




Produced by Judith Boss and David Widger





THE SHADOW-LINE

A CONFESSION

By Joseph Conrad



"Worthy of my undying regard"



To Borys And All Others Who,
Like Himself, Have Crossed In Early Youth
The Shadow-Line Of Their Generation With Love





PART ONE


--_D'autre fois, calme plat, grand miroir De mon desespoir_.
--BAUDELAIRE


I

Only the young have such moments. I don't mean the very young. No. The
very young have, properly speaking, no moments. It is the privilege
of early youth to live in advance of its days in all the beautiful
continuity of hope which knows no pauses and no introspection.

One closes behind one the little gate of mere boyishness--and enters an
enchanted garden. Its very shades glow with promise. Every turn of
the path has its seduction. And it isn't because it is an undiscovered
country. One knows well enough that all mankind had streamed that
way. It is the charm of universal experience from which one expects an
uncommon or personal sensation--a bit of one's own.

One goes on recognizing the landmarks of the predecessors, excited,
amused, taking the hard luck and the good luck together--the kicks and
the half-pence, as the saying is--the picturesque common lot that holds
so many possibilities for the deserving or perhaps for the lucky. Yes.
One goes on. And the time, too, goes on--till one perceives ahead a
shadow-line warning one that the region of early youth, too, must be
left behind.

This is the period of life in which such moments of which I have spoken
are likely to come. What moments? Why, the moments of boredom, of
weariness, of dissatisfaction. Rash moments. I mean moments when the
still young are inclined to commit rash actions, such as getting married
suddenly or else throwing up a job for no reason.

This is not a marriage story. It wasn't so bad as that with me. My
action, rash as it was, had more the character of divorce--almost of
desertion. For no reason on which a sensible person could put a finger I
threw up my job--chucked my berth--left the ship of which the worst that
could be said was that she was a steamship and therefore, perhaps, not
entitled to that blind loyalty which. . . . However, it's no use trying
to put a gloss on what even at the time I myself half suspected to be a
caprice.

It was in an Eastern port. She was an Eastern ship, inasmuch as then
she belonged to that port. She traded among dark islands on a blue
reef-scarred sea, with the Red Ensign over the taffrail and at her
masthead a house-flag, also red, but with a green border and with a
white crescent in it. For an Arab owned her, and a Syed at that. Hence
the green border on the flag. He was the head of a great House of
Straits Arabs, but as loyal a subject of the complex British Empire as
you could find east of the Suez Canal. World politics did not trouble
him at all, but he had a great occult power amongst his own people.

It was all one to us who owned the ship. He had to employ white men in
the shipping part of his business, and many of those he so employed had
never set eyes on him from the first to the last day. I myself saw him
but once, quite accidentally on a wharf--an old, dark little man blind
in one eye, in a snowy robe and yellow slippers. He was having his hand
severely kissed by a crowd of Malay pilgrims to whom he had done some
favour, in the way of food and money. His alms-giving, I have heard, was
most extensive, covering almost the whole Archipelago. For isn't it said
that "The charitable man is the friend of Allah"?

Excellent (and picturesque) Arab owner, about whom one needed not to
trouble one's head, a most excellent Scottish ship--for she was that
from the keep up--excellent sea-boat, easy to keep clean, most handy in
every way, and if it had not been for her internal propulsion, worthy of
any man's love, I cherish to this day a profound respect for her memory.
As to the kind of trade she was engaged in and the character of my
shipmates, I could not have been happier if I had had the life and the
men made to my order by a benevolent Enchanter.

And suddenly I left all this. I left it in that, to us, inconsequential
manner in which a bird flies away from a comfortable branch. It was
as though all unknowing I had heard a whisper or seen something.
Well--perhaps! One day I was perfectly right and the next everything was
gone--glamour, flavour, interest, contentment--everything. It was one
of these moments, you know. The green sickness of late youth descended
on me and carried me off. Carried me off that ship, I mean.

We were only four white men on board, with a large crew of Kalashes and
two Malay petty officers. The Captain stared hard as if wondering what
ailed me. But he was a sailor, and he, too, had been young at one time.
Presently a smile came to lurk under his thick iron-gray moustache, and
he observed that, of course, if I felt I must go he couldn't keep me
by main force. And it was arranged that I should be paid off the
next morning. As I was going out of his cabin he added suddenly, in a
peculiar wistful tone, that he hoped I would find what I was so anxious
to go and look for. A soft, cryptic utterance which seemed to reach
deeper than any diamond-hard tool could have done. I do believe he
understood my case.

But the second engineer attacked me differently. He was a sturdy young
Scot, with a smooth face and light eyes. His honest red countenance
emerged out of the engine-room companion and then the whole robust man,
with shirt sleeves turned up, wiping slowly the massive fore-arms with
a lump of cotton-waste. And his light eyes expressed bitter distaste, as
though our friendship had turned to ashes. He said weightily: "Oh! Aye!
I've been thinking it was about time for you to run away home and get
married to some silly girl."

It was tacitly understood in the port that John Nieven was a fierce
misogynist; and the absurd character of the sally convinced me that he
meant to be nasty--very nasty--had meant to say the most crushing thing
he could think of. My laugh sounded deprecatory. Nobody but a friend
could be so angry as that. I became a little crestfallen. Our chief
engineer also took a characteristic view of my action, but in a kindlier
spirit.

He was young, too, but very thin, and with a mist of fluffy brown beard
all round his haggard face. All day long, at sea or in harbour, he could
be seen walking hastily up and down the after-deck, wearing an
intense, spiritually rapt expression, which was caused by a perpetual
consciousness of unpleasant physical sensations in his internal economy.
For he was a confirmed dyspeptic. His view of my case was very simple.
He said it was nothing but deranged liver. Of course! He suggested I
should stay for another trip and meantime dose myself with a certain
patent medicine in which his own belief was absolute. "I'll tell you
what I'll do. I'll buy you two bottles, out of my own pocket. There. I
can't say fairer than that, can I?"

I believe he would have perpetrated the atrocity (or generosity) at the
merest sign of weakening on my part. By that time, however, I was more
discontented, disgusted, and dogged than ever. The past eighteen months,
so full of new and varied experience, appeared a dreary, prosaic waste
of days. I felt--how shall I express it?--that there was no truth to be
got out of them.

What truth? I should have been hard put to it to explain. Probably, if
pressed, I would have burst into tears simply. I was young enough for
that.

Next day the Captain and I transacted our business in the Harbour
Office. It was a lofty, big, cool, white room, where the screened light
of day glowed serenely. Everybody in it--the officials, the public--were
in white. Only the heavy polished desks gleamed darkly in a central
avenue, and some papers lying on them were blue. Enormous punkahs sent
from on high a gentle draught through that immaculate interior and upon
our perspiring heads.

The official behind the desk we approached grinned amiably and kept it
up till, in answer to his perfunctory question, "Sign off and on again?"
my Captain answered, "No! Signing off for good." And then his grin
vanished in sudden solemnity. He did not look at me again till he
handed me my papers with a sorrowful expression, as if they had been my
passports for Hades.

While I was putting them away he murmured some question to the Captain,
and I heard the latter answer good-humouredly:

"No. He leaves us to go home."

"Oh!" the other exclaimed, nodding mournfully over my sad condition.

I didn't know him outside the official building, but he leaned forward
the desk to shake hands with me, compassionately, as one would with some
poor devil going out to be hanged; and I am afraid I performed my part
ungraciously, in the hardened manner of an impenitent criminal.

No homeward-bound mail-boat was due for three or four days. Being now a
man without a ship, and having for a time broken my connection with the
sea--become, in fact, a mere potential passenger--it would have been
more appropriate perhaps if I had gone to stay at an hotel. There it
was, too, within a stone's throw of the Harbour Office, low, but somehow
palatial, displaying its white, pillared pavilions surrounded by trim
grass plots. I would have felt a passenger indeed in there! I gave it a
hostile glance and directed my steps toward the Officers' Sailors' Home.

I walked in the sunshine, disregarding it, and in the shade of the big
trees on the esplanade without enjoying it. The heat of the tropical
East descended through the leafy boughs, enveloping my thinly-clad body,
clinging to my rebellious discontent, as if to rob it of its freedom.

The Officers' Home was a large bungalow with a wide verandah and a
curiously suburban-looking little garden of bushes and a few trees
between it and the street. That institution partook somewhat of the
character of a residential club, but with a slightly Governmental
flavour about it, because it was administered by the Harbour Office. Its
manager was officially styled Chief Steward. He was an unhappy, wizened
little man, who if put into a jockey's rig would have looked the part to
perfection. But it was obvious that at some time or other in his life,
in some capacity or other, he had been connected with the sea. Possibly
in the comprehensive capacity of a failure.

I should have thought his employment a very easy one, but he used to
affirm for some reason or other that his job would be the death of him
some day. It was rather mysterious. Perhaps everything naturally was too
much trouble for him. He certainly seemed to hate having people in the
house.

On entering it I thought he must be feeling pleased. It was as still as
a tomb. I could see no one in the living rooms; and the verandah, too,
was empty, except for a man at the far end dozing prone in a long chair.
At the noise of my footsteps he opened one horribly fish-like eye. He
was a stranger to me. I retreated from there, and crossing the dining
room--a very bare apartment with a motionless punkah hanging over the
centre table--I knocked at a door labelled in black letters: "Chief
Steward."

The answer to my knock being a vexed and doleful plaint: "Oh, dear! Oh,
dear! What is it now?" I went in at once.

It was a strange room to find in the tropics. Twilight and stuffiness
reigned in there. The fellow had hung enormously ample, dusty, cheap
lace curtains over his windows, which were shut. Piles of cardboard
boxes, such as milliners and dressmakers use in Europe, cumbered the
corners; and by some means he had procured for himself the sort of
furniture that might have come out of a respectable parlour in the East
End of London--a horsehair sofa, arm-chairs of the same. I glimpsed
grimy antimacassars scattered over that horrid upholstery, which
was awe-inspiring, insomuch that one could not guess what mysterious
accident, need, or fancy had collected it there. Its owner had taken
off his tunic, and in white trousers and a thin, short-sleeved singlet
prowled behind the chair-backs nursing his meagre elbows.

An exclamation of dismay escaped him when he heard that I had come for a
stay; but he could not deny that there were plenty of vacant rooms.

"Very well. Can you give me the one I had before?"

He emitted a faint moan from behind a pile of cardboard boxes on the
table, which might have contained gloves or handkerchiefs or neckties. I
wonder what the fellow did keep in them? There was a smell of decaying
coral, or Oriental dust of zoological speciments in that den of his. I
could only see the top of his head and his unhappy eyes levelled at me
over the barrier.

"It's only for a couple of days," I said, intending to cheer him up.

"Perhaps you would like to pay in advance?" he suggested eagerly.

"Certainly not!" I burst out directly I could speak. "Never heard of
such a thing! This is the most infernal cheek. . . ."

He had seized his head in both hands--a gesture of despair which checked
my indignation.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Don't fly out like this. I am asking everybody."

"I don't believe it," I said bluntly.

"Well, I am going to. And if you gentlemen all agreed to pay in advance
I could make Hamilton pay up, too. He's always turning up ashore dead
broke, and even when he has some money he won't settle his bills. I
don't know what to do with him. He swears at me and tells me I can't
chuck a white man out into the street here. So if you only would. . . ."

I was amazed. Incredulous, too. I suspected the fellow of gratuitous
impertinence. I told him with marked emphasis that I would see him and
Hamilton hanged first, and requested him to conduct me to my room with
no more of his nonsense. He produced then a key from somewhere and led
the way out of his lair, giving me a vicious sidelong look in passing.

"Any one I know staying here?" I asked him before he left my room.

He had recovered his usual pained impatient tone, and said that Captain
Giles was there, back from a Solo Sea trip. Two other guests were
staying also. He paused. And, of course, Hamilton, he added.

"Oh, yes! Hamilton," I said, and the miserable creature took himself off
with a final groan.

His impudence still rankled when I came into the dining room at tiffin
time. He was there on duty overlooking the Chinamen servants. The tiffin
was laid on one end only of the long table, and the punkah was stirring
the hot air lazily--mostly above a barren waste of polished wood.

We were four around the cloth. The dozing stranger from the chair was
one. Both his eyes were partly opened now, but they did not seem to see
anything. He was supine. The dignified person next him, with short side
whiskers and a carefully scraped chin, was, of course, Hamilton. I have
never seen any one so full of dignity for the station in life Providence
had been pleased to place him in. I had been told that he regarded me as
a rank outsider. He raised not only his eyes, but his eyebrows as well,
at the sound I made pulling back my chair.

Captain Giles was at the head of the table. I exchanged a few words of
greeting with him and sat down on his left. Stout and pale, with a great
shiny dome of a bald forehead and prominent brown eyes, he might have
been anything but a seaman. You would not have been surprised to learn
that he was an architect. To me (I know how absurd it is) to me he
looked like a churchwarden. He had the appearance of a man from whom you
would expect sound advice, moral sentiments, with perhaps a platitude or
two thrown in on occasion, not from a desire to dazzle, but from honest
conviction.

Though very well known and appreciated in the shipping world, he had
no regular employment. He did not want it. He had his own peculiar
position. He was an expert. An expert in--how shall I say it?--in
intricate navigation. He was supposed to know more about remote and
imperfectly charted parts of the Archipelago than any man living. His
brain must have been a perfect warehouse of reefs, positions, bearings,
images of headlands, shapes of obscure coasts, aspects of innumerable
islands, desert and otherwise. Any ship, for instance, bound on a trip
to Palawan or somewhere that way would have Captain Giles on board,
either in temporary command or "to assist the master." It was said that
he had a retaining fee from a wealthy firm of Chinese steamship owners,
in view of such services. Besides, he was always ready to relieve any
man who wished to take a spell ashore for a time. No owner was ever
known to object to an arrangement of that sort. For it seemed to be the
established opinion at the port that Captain Giles was as good as
the best, if not a little better. But in Hamilton's view he was an
"outsider." I believe that for Hamilton the generalisation "outsider"
covered the whole lot of us; though I suppose that he made some
distinctions in his mind.

I didn't try to make conversation with Captain Giles, whom I had not
seen more than twice in my life. But, of course, he knew who I was.
After a while, inclining his big shiny head my way, he addressed me
first in his friendly fashion. He presumed from seeing me there, he
said, that I had come ashore for a couple of days' leave.

He was a low-voiced man. I spoke a little louder, saying that: No--I had
left the ship for good.

"A free man for a bit," was his comment.

"I suppose I may call myself that--since eleven o'clock," I said.

Hamilton had stopped eating at the sound of our voices. He laid down
his knife and fork gently, got up, and muttering something about "this
infernal heat cutting one's appetite," went out of the room. Almost
immediately we heard him leave the house down the verandah steps.

On this Captain Giles remarked easily that the fellow had no doubt gone
off to look after my old job. The Chief Steward, who had been leaning
against the wall, brought his face of an unhappy goat nearer to the
table and addressed us dolefully. His object was to unburden himself of
his eternal grievance against Hamilton. The man kept him in hot water
with the Harbour Office as to the state of his accounts. He wished
to goodness he would get my job, though in truth what would it be?
Temporary relief at best.

I said: "You needn't worry. He won't get my job. My successor is on
board already."

He was surprised, and I believe his face fell a little at the news.
Captain Giles gave a soft laugh. We got up and went out on the verandah,
leaving the supine stranger to be dealt with by the Chinamen. The last
thing I saw they had put a plate with a slice of pine-apple on it before
him and stood back to watch what would happen. But the experiment seemed
a failure. He sat insensible.

It was imparted to me in a low voice by Captain Giles that this was
an officer of some Rajah's yacht which had come into our port to be
dry-docked. Must have been "seeing life" last night, he added, wrinkling
his nose in an intimate, confidential way which pleased me vastly. For
Captain Giles had prestige. He was credited with wonderful adventures
and with some mysterious tragedy in his life. And no man had a word to
say against him. He continued:

"I remember him first coming ashore here some years ago. Seems only the
other day. He was a nice boy. Oh! these nice boys!"

I could not help laughing aloud. He looked startled, then joined in the
laugh. "No! No! I didn't mean that," he cried. "What I meant is that
some of them do go soft mighty quick out here."

Jocularly I suggested the beastly heat as the first cause. But Captain
Giles disclosed himself possessed of a deeper philosophy. Things out
East were made easy for white men. That was all right. The difficulty
was to go on keeping white, and some of these nice boys did not know
how. He gave me a searching look, and in a benevolent, heavy-uncle
manner asked point blank:

"Why did you throw up your berth?"

I became angry all of a sudden; for you can understand how exasperating
such a question was to a man who didn't know. I said to myself that I
ought to shut up that moralist; and to him aloud I said with challenging
politeness:

"Why . . . ? Do you disapprove?"

He was too disconcerted to do more than mutter confusedly: "I! . . . In
a general way. . ." and then gave me up. But he retired in good order,
under the cover of a heavily humorous remark that he, too, was getting
soft, and that this was his time for taking his little siesta--when he
was on shore. "Very bad habit. Very bad habit."

There was a simplicity in the man which would have disarmed a touchiness
even more youthful than mine. So when next day at tiffin he bent his
head toward me and said that he had met my late Captain last evening,
adding in an undertone: "He's very sorry you left. He had never had a
mate that suited him so well," I answered him earnestly, without any
affectation, that I certainly hadn't been so comfortable in any ship or
with any commander in all my sea-going days.

"Well--then," he murmured.

"Haven't you heard, Captain Giles, that I intend to go home?"

"Yes," he said benevolently. "I have heard that sort of thing so often
before."

"What of that?" I cried. I thought he was the most dull, unimaginative
man I had ever met. I don't know what more I would have said, but the
much-belated Hamilton came in just then and took his usual seat. So I
dropped into a mumble.

"Anyhow, you shall see it done this time."

Hamilton, beautifully shaved, gave Captain Giles a curt nod, but didn't
even condescend to raise his eyebrows at me; and when he spoke it was
only to tell the Chief Steward that the food on his plate wasn't fit
to be set before a gentleman. The individual addressed seemed much too
unhappy to groan. He cast his eyes up to the punkah and that was all.

Captain Giles and I got up from the table, and the stranger next to
Hamilton followed our example, manoeuvring himself to his feet with
difficulty. He, poor fellow, not because he was hungry but I verily
believe only to recover his self-respect, had tried to put some of that
unworthy food into his mouth. But after dropping his fork twice and
generally making a failure of it, he had sat still with an air of
intense mortification combined with a ghastly glazed stare. Both Giles
and I had avoided looking his way at table.

On the verandah he stopped short on purpose to address to us anxiously
a long remark which I failed to understand completely. It sounded like
some horrible unknown language. But when Captain Giles, after only an
instant for reflection, assured him with homely friendliness, "Aye, to
be sure. You are right there," he appeared very much gratified indeed,
and went away (pretty straight, too) to seek a distant long chair.

"What was he trying to say?" I asked with disgust.

"I don't know. Mustn't be down too much on a fellow. He's feeling pretty
wretched, you may be sure; and to-morrow he'll feel worse yet."

Judging by the man's appearance it seemed impossible. I wondered
what sort of complicated debauch had reduced him to that unspeakable
condition. Captain Giles' benevolence was spoiled by a curious air of
complacency which I disliked. I said with a little laugh:

"Well, he will have you to look after him." He made a deprecatory
gesture, sat down, and took up a paper. I did the same. The papers
were old and uninteresting, filled up mostly with dreary stereotyped
descriptions of Queen Victoria's first jubilee celebrations. Probably we
should have quickly fallen into a tropical afternoon doze if it had not
been for Hamilton's voice raised in the dining room. He was finishing
his tiffin there. The big double doors stood wide open permanently, and
he could not have had any idea how near to the doorway our chairs
were placed. He was heard in a loud, supercilious tone answering some
statement ventured by the Chief Steward.

"I am not going to be rushed into anything. They will be glad enough to
get a gentleman I imagine. There is no hurry."

A loud whispering from the Steward succeeded and then again Hamilton was
heard with even intenser scorn.

"What? That young ass who fancies himself for having been chief mate
with Kent so long? . . . Preposterous."

Giles and I looked at each other. Kent being the name of my late
commander, Captain Giles' whisper, "He's talking of you," seemed to me
sheer waste of breath. The Chief Steward must have stuck to his point,
whatever it was, because Hamilton was heard again more supercilious if
possible, and also very emphatic:

"Rubbish, my good man! One doesn't _compete_ with a rank outsider like
that. There's plenty of time."

Then there were pushing of chairs, footsteps in the next room, and
plaintive expostulations from the Steward, who was pursuing Hamilton,
even out of doors through the main entrance.

"That's a very insulting sort of man," remarked Captain
Giles--superfluously, I thought. "Very insulting. You haven't offended
him in some way, have you?"

"Never spoke to him in my life," I said grumpily. "Can't imagine what
he means by competing. He has been trying for my job after I left--and
didn't get it. But that isn't exactly competition."

Captain Giles balanced his big benevolent head thoughtfully. "He didn't
get it," he repeated very slowly. "No, not likely either, with Kent.
Kent is no end sorry you left him. He gives you the name of a good
seaman, too."

I flung away the paper I was still holding. I sat up, I slapped the
table with my open palm. I wanted to know why he would keep harping on
that, my absolutely private affair. It was exasperating, really.

Captain Giles silenced me by the perfect equanimity of his gaze.
"Nothing to be annoyed about," he murmured reasonably, with an evident
desire to soothe the childish irritation he had aroused. And he was
really a man of an appearance so inoffensive that I tried to explain
myself as much as I could. I told him that I did not want to hear
any more about what was past and gone. It had been very nice while it
lasted, but now it was done with I preferred not to talk about it or
even think about it. I had made up my mind to go home.

He listened to the whole tirade in a particular lending-the-ear
attitude, as if trying to detect a false note in it somewhere; then
straightened himself up and appeared to ponder sagaciously over the
matter.

"Yes. You told me you meant to go home. Anything in view there?"

Instead of telling him that it was none of his business I said sullenly:

"Nothing that I know of."

I had indeed considered that rather blank side of the situation I had
created for myself by leaving suddenly my very satisfactory employment.
And I was not very pleased with it. I had it on the tip of my tongue
to say that common sense had nothing to do with my action, and that
therefore it didn't deserve the interest Captain Giles seemed to be
taking in it. But he was puffing at a short wooden pipe now, and looked
so guileless, dense, and commonplace, that it seemed hardly worth while
to puzzle him either with truth or sarcasm.

He blew a cloud of smoke, then surprised me by a very abrupt: "Paid your
passage money yet?"

Overcome by the shameless pertinacity of a man to whom it was rather
difficult to be rude, I replied with exaggerated meekness that I had
not done so yet. I thought there would be plenty of time to do that
to-morrow.

And I was about to turn away, withdrawing my privacy from his fatuous,
objectless attempts to test what sort of stuff it was made of, when he
laid down his pipe in an extremely significant manner, you know, as if a
critical moment had come, and leaned sideways over the table between us.

"Oh! You haven't yet!" He dropped his voice mysteriously. "Well, then I
think you ought to know that there's something going on here."

I had never in my life felt more detached from all earthly goings on.
Freed from the sea for a time, I preserved the sailor's consciousness of
complete independence from all land affairs. How could they concern
me? I gazed at Captain Giles' animation with scorn rather than with
curiosity.

To his obviously preparatory question whether our Steward had spoken to
me that day I said he hadn't. And what's more he would have had precious
little encouragement if he had tried to. I didn't want the fellow to
speak to me at all.

Unrebuked by my petulance, Captain Giles, with an air of immense
sagacity, began to tell me a minute tale about a Harbour Office peon.
It was absolutely pointless. A peon was seen walking that morning on the
verandah with a letter in his hand. It was in an official envelope. As
the habit of these fellows is, he had shown it to the first white man
he came across. That man was our friend in the arm-chair. He, as I knew,
was not in a state to interest himself in any sublunary matters. He
could only wave the peon away. The peon then wandered on along the
verandah and came upon Captain Giles, who was there by an extraordinary
chance. . . .

At this point he stopped with a profound look. The letter, he continued,
was addressed to the Chief Steward. Now what could Captain Ellis, the
Master Attendant, want to write to the Steward for? The fellow went
every morning, anyhow, to the Harbour Office with his report, for orders
or what not. He hadn't been back more than an hour before there was an
office peon chasing him with a note. Now what was that for?

And he began to speculate. It was not for this--and it could not be for
that. As to that other thing it was unthinkable.

The fatuousness of all this made me stare. If the man had not been
somehow a sympathetic personality I would have resented it like an
insult. As it was, I felt only sorry for him. Something remarkably
earnest in his gaze prevented me from laughing in his face. Neither did
I yawn at him. I just stared.

His tone became a shade more mysterious. Directly the fellow (meaning
the Steward) got that note he rushed for his hat and bolted out of the
house. But it wasn't because the note called him to the Harbour Office.
He didn't go there. He was not absent long enough for that. He came
darting back in no time, flung his hat away, and raced about the dining
room moaning and slapping his forehead. All these exciting facts and
manifestations had been observed by Captain Giles. He had, it seems,
been meditating upon them ever since.

I began to pity him profoundly. And in a tone which I tried to make
as little sarcastic as possible I said that I was glad he had found
something to occupy his morning hours.

With his disarming simplicity he made me observe, as if it were a matter
of some consequence, how strange it was that he should have spent the
morning indoors at all. He generally was out before tiffin, visiting
various offices, seeing his friends in the harbour, and so on. He had
felt out of sorts somewhat on rising. Nothing much. Just enough to make
him feel lazy.

All this with a sustained, holding stare which, in conjunction with
the general inanity of the discourse, conveyed the impression of mild,
dreary lunacy. And when he hitched his chair a little and dropped
his voice to the low note of mystery, it flashed upon me that high
professional reputation was not necessarily a guarantee of sound mind.

It never occurred to me then that I didn't know in what soundness
of mind exactly consisted and what a delicate and, upon the whole,
unimportant matter it was. With some idea of not hurting his feelings I
blinked at him in an interested manner. But when he proceeded to ask me
mysteriously whether I remembered what had passed just now between that
Steward of ours and "that man Hamilton," I only grunted sourly assent
and turned away my head.

"Aye. But do you remember every word?" he insisted tactfully.

"I don't know. It's none of my business," I snapped out, consigning,
moreover, the Steward and Hamilton aloud to eternal perdition.

I meant to be very energetic and final, but Captain Giles continued to
gaze at me thoughtfully. Nothing could stop him. He went on to point out
that my personality was involved in that conversation. When I tried to
preserve the semblance of unconcern he became positively cruel. I heard
what the man had said? Yes? What did I think of it then?--he wanted to
know.

Captain Giles' appearance excluding the suspicion of mere sly malice,
I came to the conclusion that he was simply the most tactless idiot
on earth. I almost despised myself for the weakness of attempting to
enlighten his common understanding. I started to explain that I did not
think anything whatever. Hamilton was not worth a thought. What such an
offensive loafer . . . "Aye! that he is," interjected Captain Giles
. . . thought or said was below any decent man's contempt, and I did not
propose to take the slightest notice of it.

This attitude seemed to me so simple and obvious that I was really
astonished at Giles giving no sign of assent. Such perfect stupidity was
almost interesting.

"What would you like me to do?" I asked, laughing. "I can't start a row
with him because of the opinion he has formed of me. Of course, I've
heard of the contemptuous way he alludes to me. But he doesn't intrude
his contempt on my notice. He has never expressed it in my hearing.
For even just now he didn't know we could hear him. I should only make
myself ridiculous."

That hopeless Giles went on puffing at his pipe moodily. All at once his
face cleared, and he spoke.

"You missed my point."

"Have I? I am very glad to hear it," I said.

With increasing animation he stated again that I had missed his point.
Entirely. And in a tone of growing self-conscious complacency he told me
that few things escaped his attention, and he was rather used to think
them out, and generally from his experience of life and men arrived at
the right conclusion.

This bit of self-praise, of course, fitted excellently the laborious
inanity of the whole conversation. The whole thing strengthened in
me that obscure feeling of life being but a waste of days, which,
half-unconsciously, had driven me out of a comfortable berth, away from
men I liked, to flee from the menace of emptiness . . . and to find
inanity at the first turn. Here was a man of recognized character and
achievement disclosed as an absurd and dreary chatterer. And it was
probably like this everywhere--from east to west, from the bottom to the
top of the social scale.

A great discouragement fell on me. A spiritual drowsiness. Giles'
voice was going on complacently; the very voice of the universal hollow
conceit. And I was no longer angry with it. There was nothing original,
nothing new, startling, informing, to expect from the world; no
opportunities to find out something about oneself, no wisdom to acquire,
no fun to enjoy. Everything was stupid and overrated, even as Captain
Giles was. So be it.

The name of Hamilton suddenly caught my ear and roused me up.

"I thought we had done with him," I said, with the greatest possible
distaste.

"Yes. But considering what we happened to hear just now I think you
ought to do it."

"Ought to do it?" I sat up bewildered. "Do what?"

Captain Giles confronted me very much surprised.

"Why! Do what I have been advising you to try. You go and ask the
Steward what was there in that letter from the Harbour Office. Ask him
straight out."

I remained speechless for a time. Here was something unexpected
and original enough to be altogether incomprehensible. I murmured,
astounded:

"But I thought it was Hamilton that you . . ."

"Exactly. Don't you let him. You do what I tell you. You tackle that
Steward. You'll make him jump, I bet," insisted Captain Giles, waving
his smouldering pipe impressively at me. Then he took three rapid puffs
at it.

His aspect of triumphant acuteness was indescribable. Yet the man
remained a strangely sympathetic creature. Benevolence radiated from
him ridiculously, mildly, impressively. It was irritating, too. But I
pointed out coldly, as one who deals with the incomprehensible, that I
didn't see any reason to expose myself to a snub from the fellow. He
was a very unsatisfactory steward and a miserable wretch besides, but I
would just as soon think of tweaking his nose.

"Tweaking his nose," said Captain Giles in a scandalized tone. "Much use
it would be to you."

That remark was so irrelevant that one could make no answer to it.
But the sense of the absurdity was beginning at last to exercise its
well-known fascination. I felt I must not let the man talk to me any
more. I got up, observing curtly that he was too much for me--that I
couldn't make him out.

Before I had time to move away he spoke again in a changed tone of
obstinacy and puffing nervously at his pipe.

"Well--he's a--no account cuss--anyhow. You just--ask him. That's all."

That new manner impressed me--or rather made me pause. But sanity
asserting its sway at once I left the verandah after giving him a
mirthless smile. In a few strides I found myself in the dining room, now
cleared and empty. But during that short time various thoughts occurred
to me, such as: that Giles had been making fun of me, expecting some
amusement at my expense; that I probably looked silly and gullible; that
I knew very little of life. . . .

The door facing me across the dining room flew open to my extreme
surprise. It was the door inscribed with the word "Steward" and the
man himself ran out of his stuffy, Philistinish lair in his absurd,
hunted-animal manner, making for the garden door.

To this day I don't know what made me call after him. "I say! Wait a
minute." Perhaps it was the sidelong glance he gave me; or possibly I
was yet under the influence of Captain Giles' mysterious earnestness.
Well, it was an impulse of some sort; an effect of that force somewhere
within our lives which shapes them this way or that. For if these words
had not escaped from my lips (my will had nothing to do with that) my
existence would, to be sure, have been still a seaman's existence, but
directed on now to me utterly inconceivable lines.

No. My will had nothing to do with it. Indeed, no sooner had I made that
fateful noise than I became extremely sorry for it. Had the man stopped
and faced me I would have had to retire in disorder. For I had no notion
to carry out Captain Giles' idiotic joke, either at my own expense or at
the expense of the Steward.

But here the old human instinct of the chase came into play. He
pretended to be deaf, and I, without thinking a second about it, dashed
along my own side of the dining table and cut him off at the very door.

"Why can't you answer when you are spoken to?" I asked roughly.

He leaned against the lintel of the door. He looked extremely wretched.
Human nature is, I fear, not very nice right through. There are ugly
spots in it. I found myself growing angry, and that, I believe, only
because my quarry looked so woe-begone. Miserable beggar!

I went for him without more ado. "I understand there was an official
communication to the Home from the Harbour Office this morning. Is that
so?"

Instead of telling me to mind my own business, as he might have done,
he began to whine with an undertone of impudence. He couldn't see me
anywhere this morning. He couldn't be expected to run all over the town
after me.

"Who wants you to?" I cried. And then my eyes became opened to the
inwardness of things and speeches the triviality of which had been so
baffling and tiresome.

I told him I wanted to know what was in that letter. My sternness of
tone and behaviour was only half assumed. Curiosity can be a very fierce
sentiment--at times.

He took refuge in a silly, muttering sulkiness. It was nothing to me, he
mumbled. I had told him I was going home. And since I was going home he
didn't see why he should. . . .

That was the line of his argument, and it was irrelevant enough to be
almost insulting. Insulting to one's intelligence, I mean.

In that twilight region between youth and maturity, in which I had my
being then, one is peculiarly sensitive to that kind of insult. I am
afraid my behaviour to the Steward became very rough indeed. But it
wasn't in him to face out anything or anybody. Drug habit or solitary
tippling, perhaps. And when I forgot myself so far as to swear at him he
broke down and began to shriek.

I don't mean to say that he made a great outcry. It was a cynical
shrieking confession, only faint--piteously faint. It wasn't very
coherent either, but sufficiently so to strike me dumb at first. I
turned my eyes from him in righteous indignation, and perceived Captain
Giles in the verandah doorway surveying quietly the scene, his own
handiwork, if I may express it in that way. His smouldering black pipe
was very noticeable in his big, paternal fist. So, too, was the glitter
of his heavy gold watch-chain across the breast of his white tunic.
He exhaled an atmosphere of virtuous sagacity serene enough for any
innocent soul to fly to confidently. I flew to him.

"You would never believe it," I cried. "It was a notification that a
master is wanted for some ship. There's a command apparently going about
and this fellow puts the thing in his pocket."

The Steward screamed out in accents of loud despair: "You will be the
death of me!"

The mighty slap he gave his wretched forehead was very loud, too. But
when I turned to look at him he was no longer there. He had rushed away
somewhere out of sight. This sudden disappearance made me laugh.

This was the end of the incident--for me. Captain Giles, however,
staring at the place where the Steward had been, began to haul at his
gorgeous gold chain till at last the watch came up from the deep pocket
like solid truth from a well. Solemnly he lowered it down again and only
then said:

"Just three o'clock. You will be in time--if you don't lose any, that
is."

"In time for what?" I asked.

"Good Lord! For the Harbour Office. This must be looked into."

Strictly speaking, he was right. But I've never had much taste for
investigation, for showing people up and all that no doubt ethically
meritorious kind of work. And my view of the episode was purely ethical.
If any one had to be the death of the Steward I didn't see why it
shouldn't be Captain Giles himself, a man of age and standing, and a
permanent resident. Whereas, I in comparison, felt myself a mere bird
of passage in that port. In fact, it might have been said that I had
already broken off my connection. I muttered that I didn't think--it was
nothing to me. . . .

"Nothing!" repeated Captain Giles, giving some signs of quiet,
deliberate indignation. "Kent warned me you were a peculiar young
fellow. You will tell me next that a command is nothing to you--and
after all the trouble I've taken, too!"

"The trouble!" I murmured, uncomprehending. What trouble? All I could
remember was being mystified and bored by his conversation for a solid
hour after tiffin. And he called that taking a lot of trouble.

He was looking at me with a self-complacency which would have been
odious in any other man. All at once, as if a page of a book had been
turned over disclosing a word which made plain all that had gone before,
I perceived that this matter had also another than an ethical aspect.

And still I did not move. Captain Giles lost his patience a little. With
an angry puff at his pipe he turned his back on my hesitation.

But it was not hesitation on my part. I had been, if I may express
myself so, put out of gear mentally. But as soon as I had convinced
myself that this stale, unprofitable world of my discontent contained
such a thing as a command to be seized, I recovered my powers of
locomotion.

It's a good step from the Officers' Home to the Harbour Office; but with
the magic word "Command" in my head I found myself suddenly on the quay
as if transported there in the twinkling of an eye, before a portal of
dressed white stone above a flight of shallow white steps.

All this seemed to glide toward me swiftly. The whole great roadstead
to the right was just a mere flicker of blue, and the dim cool hall
swallowed me up out of the heat and glare of which I had not been aware
till the very moment I passed in from it.

The broad inner staircase insinuated itself under my feet somehow.
Command is a strong magic. The first human beings I perceived distinctly
since I had parted with the indignant back of Captain Giles were the
crew of the harbour steam-launch lounging on the spacious landing about
the curtained archway of the shipping office.

It was there that my buoyancy abandoned me. The atmosphere of
officialdom would kill anything that breathes the air of human
endeavour, would extinguish hope and fear alike in the supremacy of
paper and ink. I passed heavily under the curtain which the Malay
coxswain of the harbour launch raised for me. There was nobody in the
office except the clerks, writing in two industrious rows. But the head
Shipping-Master hopped down from his elevation and hurried along on the
thick mats to meet me in the broad central passage.

He had a Scottish name, but his complexion was of a rich olive hue, his
short beard was jet black, and his eyes, also black, had a languishing
expression. He asked confidentially:

"You want to see Him?"

All lightness of spirit and body having departed from me at the touch
of officialdom, I looked at the scribe without animation and asked in my
turn wearily:

"What do you think? Is it any use?"

"My goodness! He has asked for you twice today."

This emphatic He was the supreme authority, the Marine Superintendent,
the Harbour-Master--a very great person in the eyes of every single
quill-driver in the room. But that was nothing to the opinion he had of
his own greatness.

Captain Ellis looked upon himself as a sort of divine (pagan) emanation,
the deputy-Neptune for the circumambient seas. If he did not actually
rule the waves, he pretended to rule the fate of the mortals whose lives
were cast upon the waters.

This uplifting illusion made him inquisitorial and peremptory. And as
his temperament was choleric there were fellows who were actually afraid
of him. He was redoubtable, not in virtue of his office, but because of
his unwarrantable assumptions. I had never had anything to do with him
before.

I said: "Oh! He has asked for me twice. Then perhaps I had better go
in."

"You must! You must!"

The Shipping-Master led the way with a mincing gait around the whole
system of desks to a tall and important-looking door, which he opened
with a deferential action of the arm.

He stepped right in (but without letting go of the handle) and, after
gazing reverently down the room for a while, beckoned me in by a silent
jerk of the head. Then he slipped out at once and shut the door after me
most delicately.

Three lofty windows gave on the harbour. There was nothing in them but
the dark-blue sparkling sea and the paler luminous blue of the sky. My
eye caught in the depths and distances of these blue tones the white
speck of some big ship just arrived and about to anchor in the outer
roadstead. A ship from home--after perhaps ninety days at sea. There is
something touching about a ship coming in from sea and folding her white
wings for a rest.

The next thing I saw was the top-knot of silver hair surmounting Captain
Ellis' smooth red face, which would have been apoplectic if it hadn't
had such a fresh appearance.

Our deputy-Neptune had no beard on his chin, and there was no trident
to be seen standing in a corner anywhere, like an umbrella. But his
hand was holding a pen--the official pen, far mightier than the sword in
making or marring the fortune of simple toiling men. He was looking over
his shoulder at my advance.

When I had come well within range he saluted me by a nerve-shattering:
"Where have you been all this time?"

As it was no concern of his I did not take the slightest notice of the
shot. I said simply that I had heard there was a master needed for some
vessel, and being a sailing-ship man I thought I would apply. . . .

He interrupted me. "Why! Hang it! _You_ are the right man for that job--if
there had been twenty others after it. But no fear of that. They are all
afraid to catch hold. That's what's the matter."

He was very irritated. I said innocently: "Are they, sir. I wonder why?"

"Why!" he fumed. "Afraid of the sails. Afraid of a white crew. Too much
trouble. Too much work. Too long out here. Easy life and deck-chairs
more their mark. Here I sit with the Consul-General's cable before me,
and the only man fit for the job not to be found anywhere. I began to
think you were funking it, too. . . ."

"I haven't been long getting to the office," I remarked calmly.

"You have a good name out here, though," he growled savagely without
looking at me.

"I am very glad to hear it from you, sir," I said.

"Yes. But you are not on the spot when you are wanted. You know you
weren't. That steward of yours wouldn't dare to neglect a message from
this office. Where the devil did you hide yourself for the best part of
the day?"

I only smiled kindly down on him, and he seemed to recollect himself,
and asked me to take a seat. He explained that the master of a British
ship having died in Bangkok the Consul-General had cabled to him a
request for a competent man to be sent out to take command.

Apparently, in his mind, I was the man from the first, though for the
looks of the thing the notification addressed to the Sailors' Home was
general. An agreement had already been prepared. He gave it to me to
read, and when I handed it back to him with the remark that I accepted
its terms, the deputy-Neptune signed it, stamped it with his own exalted
hand, folded it in four (it was a sheet of blue foolscap) and presented
it to me--a gift of extraordinary potency, for, as I put it in my
pocket, my head swam a little.

"This is your appointment to the command," he said with a certain
gravity. "An official appointment binding the owners to conditions which
you have accepted. Now--when will you be ready to go?"

I said I would be ready that very day if necessary. He caught me at my
word with great alacrity. The steamer Melita was leaving for Bangkok
that evening about seven. He would request her captain officially to
give me a passage and wait for me till ten o'clock.

Then he rose from his office chair, and I got up, too. My head swam,
there was no doubt about it, and I felt a certain heaviness of limbs as
if they had grown bigger since I had sat down on that chair. I made my
bow.

A subtle change in Captain Ellis' manner became perceptible as though
he had laid aside the trident of deputy-Neptune. In reality, it was only
his official pen that he had dropped on getting up.




II

He shook hands with me: "Well, there you are, on your own, appointed
officially under my responsibility."

He was actually walking with me to the door. What a distance off it
seemed! I moved like a man in bonds. But we reached it at last. I opened
it with the sensation of dealing with mere dream-stuff, and then at the
last moment the fellowship of seamen asserted itself, stronger than
the difference of age and station. It asserted itself in Captain Ellis'
voice.

"Good-bye--and good luck to you," he said so heartily that I could only
give him a grateful glance. Then I turned and went out, never to see him
again in my life. I had not made three steps into the outer office when
I heard behind my back a gruff, loud, authoritative voice, the voice of
our deputy-Neptune.

It was addressing the head Shipping-Master who, having let me in, had,
apparently, remained hovering in the middle distance ever since. "Mr. R.,
let the harbour launch have steam up to take the captain here on board
the Melita at half-past nine to-night."

I was amazed at the startled alacrity of R's "Yes, sir." He ran before
me out on the landing. My new dignity sat yet so lightly on me that
I was not aware that it was I, the Captain, the object of this last
graciousness. It seemed as if all of a sudden a pair of wings had grown
on my shoulders. I merely skimmed along the polished floor.

But R. was impressed.

"I say!" he exclaimed on the landing, while the Malay crew of the
steam-launch standing by looked stonily at the man for whom they were
going to be kept on duty so late, away from their gambling, from their
girls, or their pure domestic joys. "I say! His own launch. What have
you done to him?"

His stare was full of respectful curiosity. I was quite confounded.

"Was it for me? I hadn't the slightest notion," I stammered out.

He nodded many times. "Yes. And the last person who had it before you
was a Duke. So, there!"

I think he expected me to faint on the spot. But I was in too much of a
hurry for emotional displays. My feelings were already in such a whirl
that this staggering information did not seem to make the slightest
difference. It merely fell into the seething cauldron of my brain, and
I carried it off with me after a short but effusive passage of
leave-taking with R.

The favour of the great throws an aureole round the fortunate object of
its selection. That excellent man enquired whether he could do anything
for me. He had known me only by sight, and he was well aware he would
never see me again; I was, in common with the other seamen of the port,
merely a subject for official writing, filling up of forms with all the
artificial superiority of a man of pen and ink to the men who grapple
with realities outside the consecrated walls of official buildings. What
ghosts we must have been to him! Mere symbols to juggle with in books
and heavy registers, without brains and muscles and perplexities;
something hardly useful and decidedly inferior.

And he--the office hours being over--wanted to know if he could be of
any use to me!

I ought--properly speaking--I ought to have been moved to tears. But I
did not even think of it. It was merely another miraculous manifestation
of that day of miracles. I parted from him as if he were a mere symbol.
I floated down the staircase. I floated out of the official and imposing
portal. I went on floating along.

I use that word rather than the word "flew," because I have a distinct
impression that, though uplifted by my aroused youth, my movements were
deliberate enough. To that mixed white, brown, and yellow portion of
mankind, out abroad on their own affairs, I presented the appearance
of a man walking rather sedately. And nothing in the way of abstraction
could have equalled my deep detachment from the forms and colours of
this world. It was, as it were, final.

And yet, suddenly, I recognized Hamilton. I recognized him without
effort, without a shock, without a start. There he was, strolling toward
the Harbour Office with his stiff, arrogant dignity. His red face made
him noticeable at a distance. It flamed, over there, on the shady side
of the street.

He had perceived me, too. Something (unconscious exuberance of spirits
perhaps) moved me to wave my hand to him elaborately. This lapse from
good taste happened before I was aware that I was capable of it.

The impact of my impudence stopped him short, much as a bullet might
have done. I verily believe he staggered, though as far as I could see
he didn't actually fall. I had gone past in a moment and did not turn my
head. I had forgotten his existence.

The next ten minutes might have been ten seconds or ten centuries for
all my consciousness had to do with it. People might have been falling
dead around me, houses crumbling, guns firing, I wouldn't have known.
I was thinking: "By Jove! I have got it." _It_ being the command. It had
come about in a way utterly unforeseen in my modest day-dreams.

I perceived that my imagination had been running in conventional
channels and that my hopes had always been drab stuff. I had envisaged a
command as a result of a slow course of promotion in the employ of some
highly respectable firm. The reward of faithful service. Well, faithful
service was all right. One would naturally give that for one's own sake,
for the sake of the ship, for the love of the life of one's choice; not
for the sake of the reward.

There is something distasteful in the notion of a reward.

And now here I had my command, absolutely in my pocket, in a way
undeniable indeed, but most unexpected; beyond my imaginings, outside
all reasonable expectations, and even notwithstanding the existence of
some sort of obscure intrigue to keep it away from me. It is true that
the intrigue was feeble, but it helped the feeling of wonder--as if I
had been specially destined for that ship I did not know, by some power
higher than the prosaic agencies of the commercial world.

A strange sense of exultation began to creep into me. If I had worked
for that command ten years or more there would have been nothing of the
kind. I was a little frightened.

"Let us be calm," I said to myself.

Outside the door of the Officers' Home the wretched Steward seemed to be
waiting for me. There was a broad flight of a few steps, and he ran
to and fro on the top of it as if chained there. A distressed cur. He
looked as though his throat were too dry for him to bark.

I regret to say I stopped before going in. There had been a revolution
in my moral nature. He waited open-mouthed, breathless, while I looked
at him for half a minute.

"And you thought you could keep me out of it," I said scathingly.

"You said you were going home," he squeaked miserably. "You said so. You
said so."

"I wonder what Captain Ellis will have to say to that excuse," I uttered
slowly with a sinister meaning.

His lower jaw had been trembling all the time and his voice was like the
bleating of a sick goat. "You have given me away? You have done for me?"

Neither his distress nor yet the sheer absurdity of it was able to
disarm me. It was the first instance of harm being attempted to be done
to me--at any rate, the first I had ever found out. And I was still
young enough, still too much on this side of the shadow line, not to be
surprised and indignant at such things.

I gazed at him inflexibly. Let the beggar suffer. He slapped his
forehead and I passed in, pursued, into the dining room, by his screech:
"I always said you'd be the death of me."

This clamour not only overtook me, but went ahead as it were on to the
verandah and brought out Captain Giles.

He stood before me in the doorway in all the commonplace solidity of
his wisdom. The gold chain glittered on his breast. He clutched a
smouldering pipe.

I extended my hand to him warmly and he seemed surprised, but did
respond heartily enough in the end, with a faint smile of superior
knowledge which cut my thanks short as if with a knife. I don't think
that more than one word came out. And even for that one, judging by the
temperature of my face, I had blushed as if for a bad action. Assuming a
detached tone, I wondered how on earth he had managed to spot the little
underhand game that had been going on.

He murmured complacently that there were but few things done in the town
that he could not see the inside of. And as to this house, he had been
using it off and on for nearly ten years. Nothing that went on in it
could escape his great experience. It had been no trouble to him. No
trouble at all.

Then in his quiet, thick tone he wanted to know if I had complained
formally of the Steward's action.

I said that I hadn't--though, indeed, it was not for want of
opportunity. Captain Ellis had gone for me bald-headed in a most
ridiculous fashion for being out of the way when wanted.

"Funny old gentleman," interjected Captain Giles. "What did you say to
that?"

"I said simply that I came along the very moment I heard of his message.
Nothing more. I didn't want to hurt the Steward. I would scorn to harm
such an object. No. I made no complaint, but I believe he thinks I've
done so. Let him think. He's got a fright he won't forget in a hurry,
for Captain Ellis would kick him out into the middle of Asia. . . ."

"Wait a moment," said Captain Giles, leaving me suddenly. I sat down
feeling very tired, mostly in my head. Before I could start a train of
thought he stood again before me, murmuring the excuse that he had to go
and put the fellow's mind at ease.

I looked up with surprise. But in reality I was indifferent. He
explained that he had found the Steward lying face downward on the
horsehair sofa. He was all right now.

"He would not have died of fright," I said contemptuously.

"No. But he might have taken an overdose out of one of them little
bottles he keeps in his room," Captain Giles argued seriously. "The
confounded fool has tried to poison himself once--a few years ago."

"Really," I said without emotion. "He doesn't seem very fit to live,
anyhow."

"As to that, it may be said of a good many."

"Don't exaggerate like this!" I protested, laughing irritably. "But I
wonder what this part of the world would do if you were to leave off
looking after it, Captain Giles? Here you have got me a command and
saved the Steward's life in one afternoon. Though why you should have
taken all that interest in either of us is more than I can understand."

Captain Giles remained silent for a minute. Then gravely:

"He's not a bad steward really. He can find a good cook, at any rate.
And, what's more, he can keep him when found. I remember the cooks we
had here before his time! . . ."

I must have made a movement of impatience, because he interrupted
himself with an apology for keeping me yarning there, while no doubt I
needed all my time to get ready.

What I really needed was to be alone for a bit. I seized this opening
hastily. My bedroom was a quiet refuge in an apparently uninhabited wing
of the building. Having absolutely nothing to do (for I had not unpacked
my things), I sat down on the bed and abandoned myself to the influences
of the hour. To the unexpected influences. . . .

And first I wondered at my state of mind. Why was I not more surprised?
Why? Here I was, invested with a command in the twinkling of an eye, not
in the common course of human affairs, but more as if by enchantment. I
ought to have been lost in astonishment. But I wasn't. I was very much
like people in fairy tales. Nothing ever astonishes them. When a fully
appointed gala coach is produced out of a pumpkin to take her to a ball,
Cinderella does not exclaim. She gets in quietly and drives away to her
high fortune.

Captain Ellis (a fierce sort of fairy) had produced a command out of a
drawer almost as unexpectedly as in a fairy tale. But a command is an
abstract idea, and it seemed a sort of "lesser marvel" till it flashed
upon me that it involved the concrete existence of a ship.

A ship! My ship! She was mine, more absolutely mine for possession
and care than anything in the world; an object of responsibility and
devotion. She was there waiting for me, spell-bound, unable to move,
to live, to get out into the world (till I came), like an enchanted
princess. Her call had come to me as if from the clouds. I had never
suspected her existence. I didn't know how she looked, I had barely
heard her name, and yet we were indissolubly united for a certain
portion of our future, to sink or swim together!

A sudden passion of anxious impatience rushed through my veins, gave me
such a sense of the intensity of existence as I have never felt before
or since. I discovered how much of a seaman I was, in heart, in mind,
and, as it were, physically--a man exclusively of sea and ships; the sea
the only world that counted, and the ships, the test of manliness, of
temperament, of courage and fidelity--and of love.

I had an exquisite moment. It was unique also. Jumping up from my seat,
I paced up and down my room for a long time. But when I came downstairs
I behaved with sufficient composure. Only I couldn't eat anything at
dinner.

Having declared my intention not to drive but to walk down to the quay,
I must render the wretched Steward justice that he bestirred himself
to find me some coolies for the luggage. They departed, carrying all
my worldly possessions (except a little money I had in my pocket) slung
from a long pole. Captain Giles volunteered to walk down with me.

We followed the sombre, shaded alley across the Esplanade. It was
moderately cool there under the trees. Captain Giles remarked, with a
sudden laugh: "I know who's jolly thankful at having seen the last of
you."

I guessed that he meant the Steward. The fellow had borne himself to me
in a sulkily frightened manner at the last. I expressed my wonder that
he should have tried to do me a bad turn for no reason at all.

"Don't you see that what he wanted was to get rid of our friend Hamilton
by dodging him in front of you for that job? That would have removed him
for good. See?"

"Heavens!" I exclaimed, feeling humiliated somehow. "Can it be possible?
What a fool he must be! That overbearing, impudent loafer! Why! He
couldn't. . . . And yet he's nearly done it, I believe; for the Harbour
Office was bound to send somebody."

"Aye. A fool like our Steward can be dangerous sometimes," declared
Captain Giles sententiously. "Just because he is a fool," he added,
imparting further instruction in his complacent low tones. "For," he
continued in the manner of a set demonstration, "no sensible person
would risk being kicked out of the only berth between himself and
starvation just to get rid of a simple annoyance--a small worry.
Would he now?"

"Well, no," I conceded, restraining a desire to laugh at that something
mysteriously earnest in delivering the conclusions of his wisdom as
though it were the product of prohibited operations. "But that fellow
looks as if he were rather crazy. He must be."

"As to that, I believe everybody in the world is a little mad," he
announced quietly.

"You make no exceptions?" I inquired, just to hear his manner.

"Why! Kent says that even of you."

"Does he?" I retorted, extremely embittered all at once against my
former captain. "There's nothing of that in the written character from
him which I've got in my pocket. Has he given you any instances of my
lunacy?"

Captain Giles explained in a conciliating tone that it had been only
a friendly remark in reference to my abrupt leaving the ship for no
apparent reason.

I muttered grumpily: "Oh! leaving his ship," and mended my pace. He
kept up by my side in the deep gloom of the avenue as if it were
his conscientious duty to see me out of the colony as an undesirable
character. He panted a little, which was rather pathetic in a way. But
I was not moved. On the contrary. His discomfort gave me a sort of
malicious pleasure.

Presently I relented, slowed down, and said:

"What I really wanted was to get a fresh grip. I felt it was time. Is
that so very mad?"

He made no answer. We were issuing from the avenue. On the bridge over
the canal a dark, irresolute figure seemed to be awaiting something or
somebody.

It was a Malay policeman, barefooted, in his blue uniform. The silver
band on his little round cap shone dimly in the light of the street
lamp. He peered in our direction timidly.

Before we could come up to him he turned about and walked in front of us
in the direction of the jetty. The distance was some hundred yards; and
then I found my coolies squatting on their heels. They had kept the pole
on their shoulders, and all my worldly goods, still tied to the pole,
were resting on the ground between them. As far as the eye could reach
along the quay there was not another soul abroad except the police peon,
who saluted us.

It seems he had detained the coolies as suspicious characters, and had
forbidden them the jetty. But at a sign from me he took off the embargo
with alacrity. The two patient fellows, rising together with a faint
grunt, trotted off along the planks, and I prepared to take my leave of
Captain Giles, who stood there with an air as though his mission were
drawing to a close. It could not be denied that he had done it all. And
while I hesitated about an appropriate sentence he made himself heard:

"I expect you'll have your hands pretty full of tangled-up business."

I asked him what made him think so; and he answered that it was his
general experience of the world. Ship a long time away from her port,
owners inaccessible by cable, and the only man who could explain matters
dead and buried.

"And you yourself new to the business in a way," he concluded in a sort
of unanswerable tone.

"Don't insist," I said. "I know it only too well. I only wish you could
impart to me some small portion of your experience before I go. As it
can't be done in ten minutes I had better not begin to ask you. There's
that harbour launch waiting for me, too. But I won't feel really at
peace till I have that ship of mine out in the Indian Ocean."

He remarked casually that from Bangkok to the Indian Ocean was a pretty
long step. And this murmur, like a dim flash from a dark lantern, showed
me for a moment the broad belt of islands and reefs between that unknown
ship, which was mine, and the freedom of the great waters of the globe.

But I felt no apprehension. I was familiar enough with the Archipelago
by that time. Extreme patience and extreme care would see me through the
region of broken land, of faint airs, and of dead water to where I would
feel at last my command swing on the great swell and list over to the
great breath of regular winds, that would give her the feeling of a
large, more intense life. The road would be long. All roads are long
that lead toward one's heart's desire. But this road my mind's eye
could see on a chart, professionally, with all its complications and
difficulties, yet simple enough in a way. One is a seaman or one is not.
And I had no doubt of being one.

The only part I was a stranger to was the Gulf of Siam. And I mentioned
this to Captain Giles. Not that I was concerned very much. It belonged
to the same region the nature of which I knew, into whose very soul
I seemed to have looked during the last months of that existence with
which I had broken now, suddenly, as one parts with some enchanting
company.

"The gulf . . . Ay! A funny piece of water--that," said Captain Giles.

Funny, in this connection, was a vague word. The whole thing sounded
like an opinion uttered by a cautious person mindful of actions for
slander.

I didn't inquire as to the nature of that funniness. There was really no
time. But at the very last he volunteered a warning.

"Whatever you do keep to the east side of it. The west side is dangerous
at this time of the year. Don't let anything tempt you over. You'll find
nothing but trouble there."

Though I could hardly imagine what could tempt me to involve my ship
amongst the currents and reefs of the Malay shore, I thanked him for the
advice.

He gripped my extended arm warmly, and the end of our acquaintance came
suddenly in the words: "Good-night."

That was all he said: "Good-night." Nothing more. I don't know what I
intended to say, but surprise made me swallow it, whatever it was. I
choked slightly, and then exclaimed with a sort of nervous haste: "Oh!
Good-night, Captain Giles, good-night."

His movements were always deliberate, but his back had receded some
distance along the deserted quay before I collected myself enough to
follow his example and made a half turn in the direction of the jetty.

Only my movements were not deliberate. I hurried down to the steps, and
leaped into the launch. Before I had fairly landed in her sternsheets
the slim little craft darted away from the jetty with a sudden swirl of
her propeller and the hard, rapid puffing of the exhaust in her vaguely
gleaming brass funnel amidships.

The misty churning at her stern was the only sound in the world. The
shore lay plunged in the silence of the deeper slumber. I watched the
town recede still and soundless in the hot night, till the abrupt hail,
"Steam-launch, ahoy!" made me spin round face forward. We were close to
a white ghostly steamer. Lights shone on her decks, in her portholes.
And the same voice shouted from her:

"Is that our passenger?"

"It is," I yelled.

Her crew had been obviously on the jump. I could hear them running
about. The modern spirit of haste was loudly vocal in the orders to
"Heave away on the cable"--to "Lower the sideladder," and in urgent
requests to me to "Come along, sir! We have been delayed three hours for
you. . . . Our time is seven o'clock, you know!"

I stepped on the deck. I said "No! I don't know." The spirit of modern
hurry was embodied in a thin, long-armed, long-legged man, with a
closely clipped gray beard. His meagre hand was hot and dry. He declared
feverishly:

"I am hanged if I would have waited another five minutes Harbour-Master
or no Harbour-Master."

"That's your own business," I said. "I didn't ask you to wait for me."

"I hope you don't expect any supper," he burst out. "This isn't a
boarding-house afloat. You are the first passenger I ever had in my life
and I hope to goodness you will be the last."

I made no answer to this hospitable communication; and, indeed, he
didn't wait for any, bolting away on to his bridge to get his ship under
way.

The three days he had me on board he did not depart from that
half-hostile attitude. His ship having been delayed three hours on
my account he couldn't forgive me for not being a more distinguished
person. He was not exactly outspoken about it, but that feeling of
annoyed wonder was peeping out perpetually in his talk.

He was absurd.

He was also a man of much experience, which he liked to trot out; but no
greater contrast with Captain Giles could have been imagined. He would
have amused me if I had wanted to be amused. But I did not want to be
amused. I was like a lover looking forward to a meeting. Human hostility
was nothing to me. I thought of my unknown ship. It was amusement
enough, torment enough, occupation enough.

He perceived my state, for his wits were sufficiently sharp for that,
and he poked sly fun at my preoccupation in the manner some nasty,
cynical old men assume toward the dreams and illusions of youth. I, on
my side, refrained from questioning him as to the appearance of my ship,
though I knew that being in Bangkok every fortnight or so he must have
known her by sight. I was not going to expose the ship, my ship! to some
slighting reference.

He was the first really unsympathetic man I had ever come in contact
with. My education was far from being finished, though I didn't know it.
No! I didn't know it.

All I knew was that he disliked me and had some contempt for my person.
Why? Apparently because his ship had been delayed three hours on my
account. Who was I to have such a thing done for me? Such a thing had
never been done for him. It was a sort of jealous indignation.

My expectation, mingled with fear, was wrought to its highest pitch. How
slow had been the days of the passage and how soon they were over.
One morning, early, we crossed the bar, and while the sun was
rising splendidly over the flat spaces of the land we steamed up the
innumerable bends, passed under the shadow of the great gilt pagoda, and
reached the outskirts of the town.

There it was, spread largely on both banks, the Oriental capital which
had as yet suffered no white conqueror; an expanse of brown houses of
bamboo, of mats, of leaves, of a vegetable-matter style of architecture,
sprung out of the brown soil on the banks of the muddy river. It was
amazing to think that in those miles of human habitations there was not
probably half a dozen pounds of nails. Some of those houses of sticks
and grass, like the nests of an aquatic race, clung to the low shores.
Others seemed to grow out of the water; others again floated in long
anchored rows in the very middle of the stream. Here and there in the
distance, above the crowded mob of low, brown roof ridges, towered great
piles of masonry, King's Palace, temples, gorgeous and dilapidated,
crumbling under the vertical sunlight, tremendous, overpowering, almost
palpable, which seemed to enter one's breast with the breath of one's
nostrils and soak into one's limbs through every pore of one's skin.

The ridiculous victim of jealousy had for some reason or other to stop
his engines just then. The steamer drifted slowly up with the tide.
Oblivious of my new surroundings I walked the deck, in anxious, deadened
abstraction, a commingling of romantic reverie with a very practical
survey of my qualifications. For the time was approaching for me to
behold my command and to prove my worth in the ultimate test of my
profession.

Suddenly I heard myself called by that imbecile. He was beckoning me to
come up on his bridge.

I didn't care very much for that, but as it seemed that he had something
particular to say I went up the ladder.

He laid his hand on my shoulder and gave me a slight turn, pointing with
his other arm at the same time.

"There! That's your ship, Captain," he said.

I felt a thump in my breast--only one, as if my heart had then ceased to
beat. There were ten or more ships moored along the bank, and the one he
meant was partly hidden away from my sight by her next astern. He said:
"We'll drift abreast her in a moment."

What was his tone? Mocking? Threatening? Or only indifferent? I could
not tell. I suspected some malice in this unexpected manifestation of
interest.

He left me, and I leaned over the rail of the bridge looking over the
side. I dared not raise my eyes. Yet it had to be done--and, indeed, I
could not have helped myself. I believe I trembled.

But directly my eyes had rested on my ship all my fear vanished. It went
off swiftly, like a bad dream. Only that a dream leaves no shame behind
it, and that I felt a momentary shame at my unworthy suspicions.

Yes, there she was. Her hull, her rigging filled my eye with a great
content. That feeling of life-emptiness which had made me so restless for
the last few months lost its bitter plausibility, its evil influence,
dissolved in a flow of joyous emotion.

At first glance I saw that she was a high-class vessel, a harmonious
creature in the lines of her fine body, in the proportioned tallness of
her spars. Whatever her age and her history, she had preserved the
stamp of her origin. She was one of those craft that, in virtue of their
design and complete finish, will never look old. Amongst her companions
moored to the bank, and all bigger than herself, she looked like a
creature of high breed--an Arab steed in a string of cart-horses.

A voice behind me said in a nasty equivocal tone: "I hope you are
satisfied with her, Captain." I did not even turn my head. It was the
master of the steamer, and whatever he meant, whatever he thought of
her, I knew that, like some rare women, she was one of those creatures
whose mere existence is enough to awaken an unselfish delight. One feels
that it is good to be in the world in which she has her being.

That illusion of life and character which charms one in men's finest
handiwork radiated from her. An enormous bulk of teak-wood timber swung
over her hatchway; lifeless matter, looking heavier and bigger than
anything aboard of her. When they started lowering it the surge of the
tackle sent a quiver through her from water-line to the trucks up the
fine nerves of her rigging, as though she had shuddered at the weight.
It seemed cruel to load her so. . . .

Half an hour later, putting my foot on her deck for the first time, I
received the feeling of deep physical satisfaction. Nothing could equal
the fullness of that moment, the ideal completeness of that emotional
experience which had come to me without the preliminary toil and
disenchantments of an obscure career.

My rapid glance ran over her, enveloped, appropriated the form
concreting the abstract sentiment of my command. A lot of details
perceptible to a seaman struck my eye, vividly in that instant. For the
rest, I saw her disengaged from the material conditions of her being.
The shore to which she was moored was as if it did not exist. What were
to me all the countries of the globe? In all the parts of the world
washed by navigable waters our relation to each other would be the
same--and more intimate than there are words to express in the language.
Apart from that, every scene and episode would be a mere passing show.
The very gang of yellow coolies busy about the main hatch was less
substantial than the stuff dreams are made of. For who on earth would
dream of Chinamen? . . .

I went aft, ascended the poop, where, under the awning, gleamed the
brasses of the yacht-like fittings, the polished surfaces of the rails,
the glass of the skylights. Right aft two seamen, busy cleaning the
steering gear, with the reflected ripples of light running playfully
up their bent backs, went on with their work, unaware of me and of
the almost affectionate glance I threw at them in passing toward the
companion-way of the cabin.

The doors stood wide open, the slide was pushed right back. The
half-turn of the staircase cut off the view of the lobby. A low
humming ascended from below, but it stopped abruptly at the sound of my
descending footsteps.




III

The first thing I saw down there was the upper part of a man's body
projecting backward, as it were, from one of the doors at the foot of
the stairs. His eyes looked at me very wide and still. In one hand he
held a dinner plate, in the other a cloth.

"I am your new Captain," I said quietly.

In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, he had got rid of the plate and
the cloth and jumped to open the cabin door. As soon as I passed into
the saloon he vanished, but only to reappear instantly, buttoning up a
jacket he had put on with the swiftness of a "quick-change" artist.

"Where's the chief mate?" I asked.

"In the hold, I think, sir. I saw him go down the after-hatch ten
minutes ago."

"Tell him I am on board."

The mahogany table under the skylight shone in the twilight like a dark
pool of water. The sideboard, surmounted by a wide looking-glass in an
ormulu frame, had a marble top. It bore a pair of silver-plated lamps
and some other pieces--obviously a harbour display. The saloon itself was
panelled in two kinds of wood in the excellent simple taste prevailing
when the ship was built.

I sat down in the armchair at the head of the table--the captain's
chair, with a small tell-tale compass swung above it--a mute reminder of
unremitting vigilance.

A succession of men had sat in that chair. I became aware of that
thought suddenly, vividly, as though each had left a little of himself
between the four walls of these ornate bulkheads; as if a sort of
composite soul, the soul of command, had whispered suddenly to mine of
long days at sea and of anxious moments.

"You, too!" it seemed to say, "you, too, shall taste of that peace and
that unrest in a searching intimacy with your own self--obscure as we
were and as supreme in the face of all the winds and all the seas, in an
immensity that receives no impress, preserves no memories, and keeps no
reckoning of lives."

Deep within the tarnished ormulu frame, in the hot half-light sifted
through the awning, I saw my own face propped between my hands. And I
stared back at myself with the perfect detachment of distance, rather
with curiosity than with any other feeling, except of some sympathy for
this latest representative of what for all intents and purposes was a
dynasty, continuous not in blood indeed, but in its experience, in its
training, in its conception of duty, and in the blessed simplicity of
its traditional point of view on life.

It struck me that this quietly staring man whom I was watching, both as
if he were myself and somebody else, was not exactly a lonely figure.
He had his place in a line of men whom he did not know, of whom he had
never heard; but who were fashioned by the same influences, whose souls
in relation to their humble life's work had no secrets for him.

Suddenly I perceived that there was another man in the saloon, standing
a little on one side and looking intently at me. The chief mate. His
long, red moustache determined the character of his physiognomy, which
struck me as pugnacious in (strange to say) a ghastly sort of way.

How long had he been there looking at me, appraising me in my unguarded
day-dreaming state? I would have been more disconcerted if, having the
clock set in the top of the mirror-frame right in front of me, I had not
noticed that its long hand had hardly moved at all.

I could not have been in that cabin more than two minutes altogether.
Say three. . . . So he could not have been watching me more than a mere
fraction of a minute, luckily. Still, I regretted the occurrence.

But I showed nothing of it as I rose leisurely (it had to be leisurely)
and greeted him with perfect friendliness.

There was something reluctant and at the same time attentive in his
bearing. His name was Burns. We left the cabin and went round the ship
together. His face in the full light of day appeared very pale, meagre,
even haggard. Somehow I had a delicacy as to looking too often at him;
his eyes, on the contrary, remained fairly glued on my face. They were
greenish and had an expectant expression.

He answered all my questions readily enough, but my ear seemed to catch
a tone of unwillingness. The second officer, with three or four hands,
was busy forward. The mate mentioned his name and I nodded to him in
passing. He was very young. He struck me as rather a cub.

When we returned below, I sat down on one end of a deep, semi-circular,
or, rather, semi-oval settee, upholstered in red plush. It extended
right across the whole after-end of the cabin. Mr. Burns motioned to sit
down, dropped into one of the swivel-chairs round the table, and kept
his eyes on me as persistently as ever, and with that strange air as if
all this were make-believe and he expected me to get up, burst into a
laugh, slap him on the back, and vanish from the cabin.

There was an odd stress in the situation which began to make me
uncomfortable. I tried to react against this vague feeling.

"It's only my inexperience," I thought.

In the face of that man, several years, I judged, older than myself, I
became aware of what I had left already behind me--my youth. And that
was indeed poor comfort. Youth is a fine thing, a mighty power--as
long as one does not think of it. I felt I was becoming self-conscious.
Almost against my will I assumed a moody gravity. I said: "I see you
have kept her in very good order, Mr. Burns."

Directly I had uttered these words I asked myself angrily why the deuce
did I want to say that? Mr. Burns in answer had only blinked at me. What
on earth did he mean?

I fell back on a question which had been in my thoughts for a long
time--the most natural question on the lips of any seaman whatever
joining a ship. I voiced it (confound this self-consciousness) in a
degaged cheerful tone: "I suppose she can travel--what?"

Now a question like this might have been answered normally, either in
accents of apologetic sorrow or with a visibly suppressed pride, in a
"I don't want to boast, but you shall see," sort of tone. There are
sailors, too, who would have been roughly outspoken: "Lazy brute," or
openly delighted: "She's a flyer." Two ways, if four manners.

But Mr. Burns found another way, a way of his own which had, at all
events, the merit of saving his breath, if no other.

Again he did not say anything. He only frowned. And it was an angry
frown. I waited. Nothing more came.

"What's the matter? . . . Can't you tell after being nearly two years in
the ship?" I addressed him sharply.

He looked as startled for a moment as though he had discovered my
presence only that very moment. But this passed off almost at once. He
put on an air of indifference. But I suppose he thought it better to say
something. He said that a ship needed, just like a man, the chance to
show the best she could do, and that this ship had never had a chance
since he had been on board of her. Not that he could remember. The last
captain. . . . He paused.

"Has he been so very unlucky?" I asked with frank incredulity. Mr. Burns
turned his eyes away from me. No, the late captain was not an unlucky
man. One couldn't say that. But he had not seemed to want to make use of
his luck.

Mr. Burns--man of enigmatic moods--made this statement with an inanimate
face and staring wilfully at the rudder casing. The statement itself was
obscurely suggestive. I asked quietly:

"Where did he die?"

"In this saloon. Just where you are sitting now," answered Mr. Burns.

I repressed a silly impulse to jump up; but upon the whole I was
relieved to hear that he had not died in the bed which was now to be
mine. I pointed out to the chief mate that what I really wanted to know
was where he had buried his late captain.

Mr. Burns said that it was at the entrance to the gulf. A roomy grave; a
sufficient answer. But the mate, overcoming visibly something within
him--something like a curious reluctance to believe in my advent (as an
irrevocable fact, at any rate), did not stop at that--though, indeed, he
may have wished to do so.

As a compromise with his feelings, I believe, he addressed himself
persistently to the rudder-casing, so that to me he had the appearance
of a man talking in solitude, a little unconsciously, however.

His tale was that at seven bells in the forenoon watch he had all hands
mustered on the quarterdeck and told them they had better go down to say
good-bye to the captain.

Those words, as if grudged to an intruding personage, were enough for
me to evoke vividly that strange ceremony: The bare-footed, bare-headed
seamen crowding shyly into that cabin, a small mob pressed against that
sideboard, uncomfortable rather than moved, shirts open on sunburnt
chests, weather-beaten faces, and all staring at the dying man with the
same grave and expectant expression.

"Was he conscious?" I asked.

"He didn't speak, but he moved his eyes to look at them," said the mate.

After waiting a moment, Mr. Burns motioned the crew to leave the cabin,
but he detained the two eldest men to stay with the captain while he
went on deck with his sextant to "take the sun." It was getting toward
noon and he was anxious to obtain a good observation for latitude. When
he returned below to put his sextant away he found that the two men had
retreated out into the lobby. Through the open door he had a view of the
captain lying easy against the pillows. He had "passed away" while Mr.
Burns was taking this observation. As near noon as possible. He had
hardly changed his position.

Mr. Burns sighed, glanced at me inquisitively, as much as to say,
"Aren't you going yet?" and then turned his thoughts from his new
captain back to the old, who, being dead, had no authority, was not in
anybody's way, and was much easier to deal with.

Mr. Burns dealt with him at some length. He was a peculiar man--of
sixty-five about--iron gray, hard-faced, obstinate, and uncommunicative.
He used to keep the ship loafing at sea for inscrutable reasons. Would
come on deck at night sometimes, take some sail off her, God only knows
why or wherefore, then go below, shut himself up in his cabin, and play
on the violin for hours--till daybreak perhaps. In fact, he spent most
of his time day or night playing the violin. That was when the fit took
him. Very loud, too.

It came to this, that Mr. Burns mustered his courage one day and
remonstrated earnestly with the captain. Neither he nor the second mate
could get a wink of sleep in their watches below for the noise. . . .
And how could they be expected to keep awake while on duty? He pleaded.
The answer of that stern man was that if he and the second mate didn't
like the noise, they were welcome to pack up their traps and walk over
the side. When this alternative was offered the ship happened to be 600
miles from the nearest land.

Mr. Burns at this point looked at me with an air of curiosity. I began
to think that my predecessor was a remarkably peculiar old man.

But I had to hear stranger things yet. It came out that this stern,
grim, wind-tanned, rough, sea-salted, taciturn sailor of sixty-five was
not only an artist, but a lover as well. In Haiphong, when they got
there after a course of most unprofitable peregrinations (during which
the ship was nearly lost twice), he got himself, in Mr. Burns' own
words, "mixed up" with some woman. Mr. Burns had had no personal
knowledge of that affair, but positive evidence of it existed in the
shape of a photograph taken in Haiphong. Mr. Burns found it in one of
the drawers in the captain's room.

In due course I, too, saw that amazing human document (I even threw it
overboard later). There he sat, with his hands reposing on his knees,
bald, squat, gray, bristly, recalling a wild boar somehow; and by his
side towered an awful mature, white female with rapacious nostrils and a
cheaply ill-omened stare in her enormous eyes. She was disguised in some
semi-oriental, vulgar, fancy costume. She resembled a low-class medium
or one of those women who tell fortunes by cards for half a crown. And
yet she was striking. A professional sorceress from the slums. It was
incomprehensible. There was something awful in the thought that she was
the last reflection of the world of passion for the fierce soul which
seemed to look at one out of the sardonically savage face of that
old seaman. However, I noticed that she was holding some musical
instrument--guitar or mandoline--in her hand. Perhaps that was the secret
of her sortilege.

For Mr. Burns that photograph explained why the unloaded ship had kept
sweltering at anchor for three weeks in a pestilential hot harbour
without air. They lay there and gasped. The captain, appearing now and
then on short visits, mumbled to Mr. Burns unlikely tales about some
letters he was waiting for.

Suddenly, after vanishing for a week, he came on board in the middle
of the night and took the ship out to sea with the first break of dawn.
Daylight showed him looking wild and ill. The mere getting clear of the
land took two days, and somehow or other they bumped slightly on a
reef. However, no leak developed, and the captain, growling "no matter,"
informed Mr. Burns that he had made up his mind to take the ship to
Hong-Kong and drydock her there.

At this Mr. Burns was plunged into despair. For indeed, to beat up
to Hong-Kong against a fierce monsoon, with a ship not sufficiently
ballasted and with her supply of water not completed, was an insane
project.

But the captain growled peremptorily, "Stick her at it," and Mr. Burns,
dismayed and enraged, stuck her at it, and kept her at it, blowing away
sails, straining the spars, exhausting the crew--nearly maddened by the
absolute conviction that the attempt was impossible and was bound to end
in some catastrophe.

Meantime the captain, shut up in his cabin and wedged in a corner of his
settee against the crazy bounding of the ship, played the violin--or, at
any rate, made continuous noise on it.

When he appeared on deck he would not speak and not always answer when
spoken to. It was obvious that he was ill in some mysterious manner, and
beginning to break up.

As the days went by the sounds of the violin became less and less loud,
till at last only a feeble scratching would meet Mr. Burns' ear as
he stood in the saloon listening outside the door of the captain's
state-room.

One afternoon in perfect desperation he burst into that room and made
such a scene, tearing his hair and shouting such horrid imprecations
that he cowed the contemptuous spirit of the sick man. The water-tanks
were low, they had not gained fifty miles in a fortnight. She would
never reach Hong-Kong.

It was like fighting desperately toward destruction for the ship and the
men. This was evident without argument. Mr. Burns, losing all restraint,
put his face close to his captain's and fairly yelled: "You, sir, are
going out of the world. But I can't wait till you are dead before I put
the helm up. You must do it yourself. You must do it now!"

The man on the couch snarled in contempt. "So I am going out of the
world--am I?"

"Yes, sir--you haven't many days left in it," said Mr. Burns calming
down. "One can see it by your face."

"My face, eh? . . . Well, put up the helm and be damned to you."

Burns flew on deck, got the ship before the wind, then came down again
composed, but resolute.

"I've shaped a course for Pulo Condor, sir," he said. "When we make it,
if you are still with us, you'll tell me into what port you wish me to
take the ship and I'll do it."

The old man gave him a look of savage spite, and said those atrocious
words in deadly, slow tones.

"If I had my wish, neither the ship nor any of you would ever reach a
port. And I hope you won't."

Mr. Burns was profoundly shocked. I believe he was positively frightened
at the time. It seems, however, that he managed to produce such an
effective laugh that it was the old man's turn to be frightened. He
shrank within himself and turned his back on him.

"And his head was not gone then," Mr. Burns assured me excitedly. "He
meant every word of it."

"Such was practically the late captain's last speech. No connected
sentence passed his lips afterward. That night he used the last of his
strength to throw his fiddle over the side. No one had actually seen
him in the act, but after his death Mr. Burns couldn't find the thing
anywhere. The empty case was very much in evidence, but the fiddle
was clearly not in the ship. And where else could it have gone to but
overboard?"

"Threw his violin overboard!" I exclaimed.

"He did," cried Mr. Burns excitedly. "And it's my belief he would have
tried to take the ship down with him if it had been in human power. He
never meant her to see home again. He wouldn't write to his owners, he
never wrote to his old wife, either--he wasn't going to. He had made up
his mind to cut adrift from everything. That's what it was. He didn't
care for business, or freights, or for making a passage--or anything. He
meant to have gone wandering about the world till he lost her with all
hands."

Mr. Burns looked like a man who had escaped great danger. For a little
he would have exclaimed: "If it hadn't been for me!" And the transparent
innocence of his indignant eyes was underlined quaintly by the arrogant
pair of moustaches which he proceeded to twist, and as if extend,
horizontally.

I might have smiled if I had not been busy with my own sensations,
which were not those of Mr. Burns. I was already the man in command. My
sensations could not be like those of any other man on board. In that
community I stood, like a king in his country, in a class all by myself.
I mean an hereditary king, not a mere elected head of a state. I was
brought there to rule by an agency as remote from the people and as
inscrutable almost to them as the Grace of God.

And like a member of a dynasty, feeling a semimystical bond with the
dead, I was profoundly shocked by my immediate predecessor.

That man had been in all essentials but his age just such another man
as myself. Yet the end of his life was a complete act of treason, the
betrayal of a tradition which seemed to me as imperative as any guide
on earth could be. It appeared that even at sea a man could become the
victim of evil spirits. I felt on my face the breath of unknown powers
that shape our destinies.

Not to let the silence last too long I asked Mr. Burns if he had written
to his captain's wife. He shook his head. He had written to nobody.

In a moment he became sombre. He never thought of writing. It took him
all his time to watch incessantly the loading of the ship by a rascally
Chinese stevedore. In this Mr. Burns gave me the first glimpse of the
real chief mate's soul which dwelt uneasily in his body.

He mused, then hastened on with gloomy force.

"Yes! The captain died as near noon as possible. I looked through his
papers in the afternoon. I read the service over him at sunset and
then I stuck the ship's head north and brought her in here.
I--brought--her--in."

He struck the table with his fist.

"She would hardly have come in by herself," I observed. "But why didn't
you make for Singapore instead?"

His eyes wavered. "The nearest port," he muttered sullenly.

I had framed the question in perfect innocence, but his answer (the
difference in distance was insignificant) and his manner offered me a
clue to the simple truth. He took the ship to a port where he expected
to be confirmed in his temporary command from lack of a qualified master
to put over his head. Whereas Singapore, he surmised justly, would
be full of qualified men. But his naive reasoning forgot to take into
account the telegraph cable reposing on the bottom of the very Gulf up
which he had turned that ship which he imagined himself to have saved
from destruction. Hence the bitter flavour of our interview. I tasted it
more and more distinctly--and it was less and less to my taste.

"Look here, Mr. Burns," I began very firmly. "You may as well understand
that I did not run after this command. It was pushed in my way. I've
accepted it. I am here to take the ship home first of all, and you may
be sure that I shall see to it that every one of you on board here does
his duty to that end. This is all I have to say--for the present."

He was on his feet by this time, but instead of taking his dismissal
he remained with trembling, indignant lips, and looking at me hard as
though, really, after this, there was nothing for me to do in common
decency but to vanish from his outraged sight. Like all very simple
emotional states this was moving. I felt sorry for him--almost
sympathetic, till (seeing that I did not vanish) he spoke in a tone of
forced restraint.

"If I hadn't a wife and a child at home you may be sure, sir, I would
have asked you to let me go the very minute you came on board."

I answered him with a matter-of-course calmness as though some remote
third person were in question.

"And I, Mr. Burns, would not have let you go. You have signed the ship's
articles as chief officer, and till they are terminated at the final
port of discharge I shall expect you to attend to your duty and give me
the benefit of your experience to the best of your ability."

Stony incredulity lingered in his eyes: but it broke down before my
friendly attitude. With a slight upward toss of his arms (I got to know
that gesture well afterward) he bolted out of the cabin.

We might have saved ourselves that little passage of harmless sparring.
Before many days had elapsed it was Mr. Burns who was pleading with me
anxiously not to leave him behind; while I could only return him but
doubtful answers. The whole thing took on a somewhat tragic complexion.

And this horrible problem was only an extraneous episode, a mere
complication in the general problem of how to get that ship--which was
mine with her appurtenances and her men, with her body and her spirit
now slumbering in that pestilential river--how to get her out to sea.

Mr. Burns, while still acting captain, had hastened to sign a
charter-party which in an ideal world without guile would have been
an excellent document. Directly I ran my eye over it I foresaw trouble
ahead unless the people of the other part were quite exceptionally
fair-minded and open to argument.

Mr. Burns, to whom I imparted my fears, chose to take great umbrage
at them. He looked at me with that usual incredulous stare, and said
bitterly:

"I suppose, sir, you want to make out I've acted like a fool?"

I told him, with my systematic kindliness which always seemed to augment
his surprise, that I did not want to make out anything. I would leave
that to the future.

And, sure enough, the future brought in a lot of trouble. There were
days when I used to remember Captain Giles with nothing short of
abhorrence. His confounded acuteness had let me in for this job; while
his prophecy that I "would have my hands full" coming true, made it
appear as if done on purpose to play an evil joke on my young innocence.

Yes. I had my hands full of complications which were most valuable
as "experience." People have a great opinion of the advantages of
experience. But in this connection experience means always something
disagreeable as opposed to the charm and innocence of illusions.

I must say I was losing mine rapidly. But on these instructive
complications I must not enlarge more than to say that they could all be
resumed in the one word: Delay.

A mankind which has invented the proverb, "Time is money," will
understand my vexation. The word "Delay" entered the secret chamber of
my brain, resounded there like a tolling bell which maddens the ear,
affected all my senses, took on a black colouring, a bitter taste, a
deadly meaning.

"I am really sorry to see you worried like this. Indeed, I am. . . ."

It was the only humane speech I used to hear at that time. And it came
from a doctor, appropriately enough.

A doctor is humane by definition. But that man was so in reality. His
speech was not professional. I was not ill. But other people were, and
that was the reason of his visiting the ship.

He was the doctor of our Legation and, of course, of the Consulate,
too. He looked after the ship's health, which generally was poor, and
trembling, as it were, on the verge of a break-up. Yes. The men ailed.
And thus time was not only money, but life as well.

I had never seen such a steady ship's company. As the doctor remarked to
me: "You seem to have a most respectable lot of seamen." Not only were
they consistently sober, but they did not even want to go ashore. Care
was taken to expose them as little as possible to the sun. They
were employed on light work under the awnings. And the humane doctor
commended me.

"Your arrangements appear to me to be very judicious, my dear Captain."

It is difficult to express how much that pronouncement comforted me.
The doctor's round, full face framed in a light-coloured whisker was the
perfection of a dignified amenity. He was the only human being in
the world who seemed to take the slightest interest in me. He would
generally sit in the cabin for half an hour or so at every visit.

I said to him one day:

"I suppose the only thing now is to take care of them as you are doing
till I can get the ship to sea?"

He inclined his head, shutting his eyes under the large spectacles, and
murmured:

"The sea . . . undoubtedly."

The first member of the crew fairly knocked over was the steward--the
first man to whom I had spoken on board. He was taken ashore (with
choleric symptoms) and died there at the end of a week. Then, while I
was still under the startling impression of this first home-thrust of
the climate, Mr. Burns gave up and went to bed in a raging fever without
saying a word to anybody.

I believe he had partly fretted himself into that illness; the climate
did the rest with the swiftness of an invisible monster ambushed in
the air, in the water, in the mud of the river-bank. Mr. Burns was a
predestined victim.

I discovered him lying on his back, glaring sullenly and radiating heat
on one like a small furnace. He would hardly answer my questions, and
only grumbled. Couldn't a man take an afternoon off duty with a bad
headache--for once?

That evening, as I sat in the saloon after dinner, I could hear him
muttering continuously in his room. Ransome, who was clearing the table,
said to me:

"I am afraid, sir, I won't be able to give the mate all the attention
he's likely to need. I will have to be forward in the galley a great
part of my time."

Ransome was the cook. The mate had pointed him out to me the first day,
standing on the deck, his arms crossed on his broad chest, gazing on the
river.

Even at a distance his well-proportioned figure, something thoroughly
sailor-like in his poise, made him noticeable. On nearer view the
intelligent, quiet eyes, a well-bred face, the disciplined independence
of his manner made up an attractive personality. When, in addition, Mr.
Burns told me that he was the best seaman in the ship, I expressed my
surprise that in his earliest prime and of such appearance he should
sign on as cook on board a ship.

"It's his heart," Mr. Burns had said. "There's something wrong with it.
He mustn't exert himself too much or he may drop dead suddenly."

And he was the only one the climate had not touched--perhaps because,
carrying a deadly enemy in his breast, he had schooled himself into a
systematic control of feelings and movements. When one was in the secret
this was apparent in his manner. After the poor steward died, and as he
could not be replaced by a white man in this Oriental port, Ransome had
volunteered to do the double work.

"I can do it all right, sir, as long as I go about it quietly," he had
assured me.

But obviously he couldn't be expected to take up sick-nursing in
addition. Moreover, the doctor peremptorily ordered Mr. Burns ashore.

With a seaman on each side holding him up under the arms, the mate went
over the gangway more sullen than ever. We built him up with pillows in
the gharry, and he made an effort to say brokenly:

"Now--you've got--what you wanted--got me out of--the ship."

"You were never more mistaken in your life, Mr. Burns," I said quietly,
duly smiling at him; and the trap drove off to a sort of sanatorium, a
pavilion of bricks which the doctor had in the grounds of his residence.

I visited Mr. Burns regularly. After the first few days, when he didn't
know anybody, he received me as if I had come either to gloat over
an enemy or else to curry favour with a deeply wronged person. It was
either one or the other, just as it happened according to his fantastic
sickroom moods. Whichever it was, he managed to convey it to me even
during the period when he appeared almost too weak to talk. I treated
him to my invariable kindliness.

Then one day, suddenly, a surge of downright panic burst through all
this craziness.

If I left him behind in this deadly place he would die. He felt it, he
was certain of it. But I wouldn't have the heart to leave him ashore. He
had a wife and child in Sydney.

He produced his wasted forearms from under the sheet which covered him
and clasped his fleshless claws. He would die! He would die here. . . .

He absolutely managed to sit up, but only for a moment, and when he fell
back I really thought that he would die there and then. I called to the
Bengali dispenser, and hastened away from the room.

Next day he upset me thoroughly by renewing his entreaties. I returned
an evasive answer, and left him the picture of ghastly despair. The day
after I went in with reluctance, and he attacked me at once in a
much stronger voice and with an abundance of argument which was quite
startling. He presented his case with a sort of crazy vigour, and asked
me finally how would I like to have a man's death on my conscience? He
wanted me to promise that I would not sail without him.

I said that I really must consult the doctor first. He cried out at
that. The doctor! Never! That would be a death sentence.

The effort had exhausted him. He closed his eyes, but went on rambling
in a low voice. I had hated him from the start. The late captain had
hated him, too. Had wished him dead. Had wished all hands dead. . . .

"What do you want to stand in with that wicked corpse for, sir? He'll
have you, too," he ended, blinking his glazed eyes vacantly.

"Mr. Burns," I cried, very much discomposed, "what on earth are you
talking about?"

He seemed to come to himself, though he was too weak to start.

"I don't know," he said languidly. "But don't ask that doctor, sir. You
and I are sailors. Don't ask him, sir. Some day perhaps you will have a
wife and child yourself."

And again he pleaded for the promise that I would not leave him behind.
I had the firmness of mind not to give it to him. Afterward this
sternness seemed criminal; for my mind was made up. That prostrated man,
with hardly strength enough to breathe and ravaged by a passion of fear,
was irresistible. And, besides, he had happened to hit on the right
words. He and I were sailors. That was a claim, for I had no other
family. As to the wife and child (some day) argument, it had no force.
It sounded merely bizarre.

I could imagine no claim that would be stronger and more absorbing
than the claim of that ship, of these men snared in the river by silly
commercial complications, as if in some poisonous trap.

However, I had nearly fought my way out. Out to sea. The sea--which was
pure, safe, and friendly. Three days more.

That thought sustained and carried me on my way back to the ship. In the
saloon the doctor's voice greeted me, and his large form followed
his voice, issuing out of the starboard spare cabin where the ship's
medicine chest was kept securely lashed in the bed-place.

Finding that I was not on board he had gone in there, he said, to
inspect the supply of drugs, bandages, and so on. Everything was
completed and in order.

I thanked him; I had just been thinking of asking him to do that very
thing, as in a couple of days, as he knew, we were going to sea, where
all our troubles of every sort would be over at last.

He listened gravely and made no answer. But when I opened to him my mind
as to Mr. Burns he sat down by my side, and, laying his hand on my knee
amicably, begged me to think what it was I was exposing myself to.

The man was just strong enough to bear being moved and no more. But he
couldn't stand a return of the fever. I had before me a passage of sixty
days perhaps, beginning with intricate navigation and ending probably
with a lot of bad weather. Could I run the risk of having to go through
it single-handed, with no chief officer and with a second quite a youth?
. . .

He might have added that it was my first command, too. He did probably
think of that fact, for he checked himself. It was very present to my
mind.

He advised me earnestly to cable to Singapore for a chief officer, even
if I had to delay my sailing for a week.

"Never," I said. The very thought gave me the shivers. The hands seemed
fairly fit, all of them, and this was the time to get them away. Once at
sea I was not afraid of facing anything. The sea was now the only remedy
for all my troubles.

The doctor's glasses were directed at me like two lamps searching the
genuineness of my resolution. He opened his lips as if to argue further,
but shut them again without saying anything. I had a vision so vivid of
poor Burns in his exhaustion, helplessness, and anguish, that it moved
me more than the reality I had come away from only an hour before. It
was purged from the drawbacks of his personality, and I could not resist
it.

"Look here," I said. "Unless you tell me officially that the man
must not be moved I'll make arrangements to have him brought on board
tomorrow, and shall take the ship out of the river next morning, even if
I have to anchor outside the bar for a couple of days to get her ready
for sea."

"Oh! I'll make all the arrangements myself," said the doctor at once.
"I spoke as I did only as a friend--as a well-wisher, and that sort of
thing."

He rose in his dignified simplicity and gave me a warm handshake, rather
solemnly, I thought. But he was as good as his word. When Mr. Burns
appeared at the gangway carried on a stretcher, the doctor himself
walked by its side. The programme had been altered in so far that this
transportation had been left to the last moment, on the very morning of
our departure.

It was barely an hour after sunrise. The doctor waved his big arm to me
from the shore and walked back at once to his trap, which had followed
him empty to the river-side. Mr. Burns, carried across the quarter-deck,
had the appearance of being absolutely lifeless. Ransome went down to
settle him in his cabin. I had to remain on deck to look after the ship,
for the tug had got hold of our towrope already.

The splash of our shore-fasts falling in the water produced a complete
change of feeling in me. It was like the imperfect relief of awakening
from a nightmare. But when the ship's head swung down the river away
from that town, Oriental and squalid, I missed the expected elation of
that striven-for moment. What there was, undoubtedly, was a relaxation
of tension which translated itself into a sense of weariness after an
inglorious fight.

About midday we anchored a mile outside the bar. The afternoon was busy
for all hands. Watching the work from the poop, where I remained all the
time, I detected in it some of the languor of the six weeks spent in the
steaming heat of the river. The first breeze would blow that away. Now
the calm was complete. I judged that the second officer--a callow youth
with an unpromising face--was not, to put it mildly, of that invaluable
stuff from which a commander's right hand is made. But I was glad to
catch along the main deck a few smiles on those seamen's faces at which
I had hardly had time to have a good look as yet. Having thrown off the
mortal coil of shore affairs, I felt myself familiar with them and yet a
little strange, like a long-lost wanderer among his kin.

Ransome flitted continually to and fro between the galley and the cabin.
It was a pleasure to look at him. The man positively had grace. He
alone of all the crew had not had a day's illness in port. But with
the knowledge of that uneasy heart within his breast I could detect the
restraint he put on the natural sailor-like agility of his movements. It
was as though he had something very fragile or very explosive to carry
about his person and was all the time aware of it.

I had occasion to address him once or twice. He answered me in his
pleasant, quiet voice and with a faint, slightly wistful smile. Mr.
Burns appeared to be resting. He seemed fairly comfortable.

After sunset I came out on deck again to meet only a still void. The
thin, featureless crust of the coast could not be distinguished. The
darkness had risen around the ship like a mysterious emanation from the
dumb and lonely waters. I leaned on the rail and turned my ear to the
shadows of the night. Not a sound. My command might have been a planet
flying vertiginously on its appointed path in a space of infinite
silence. I clung to the rail as if my sense of balance were leaving me
for good. How absurd. I failed nervously.

"On deck there!"

The immediate answer, "Yes, sir," broke the spell. The anchor-watch
man ran up the poop ladder smartly. I told him to report at once the
slightest sign of a breeze coming.

Going below I looked in on Mr. Burns. In fact, I could not avoid seeing
him, for his door stood open. The man was so wasted that, in this white
cabin, under a white sheet, and with his diminished head sunk in the
white pillow, his red moustaches captured their eyes exclusively, like
something artificial--a pair of moustaches from a shop exhibited there
in the harsh light of the bulkhead-lamp without a shade.

While I stared with a sort of wonder he asserted himself by opening his
eyes and even moving them in my direction. A minute stir.

"Dead calm, Mr. Burns," I said resignedly.

In an unexpectedly distinct voice Mr. Burns began a rambling speech. Its
tone was very strange, not as if affected by his illness, but as if of
a different nature. It sounded unearthly. As to the matter, I seemed
to make out that it was the fault of the "old man"--the late
captain--ambushed down there under the sea with some evil intention. It
was a weird story.

I listened to the end; then stepping into the cabin I laid my hand on
the mate's forehead. It was cool. He was light-headed only from extreme
weakness. Suddenly he seemed to become aware of me, and in his own
voice--of course, very feeble--he asked regretfully:

"Is there no chance at all to get under way, sir?"

"What's the good of letting go our hold of the ground only to drift, Mr.
Burns?" I answered.

He sighed and I left him to his immobility. His hold on life was
as slender as his hold on sanity. I was oppressed by my lonely
responsibilities. I went into my cabin to seek relief in a few hours'
sleep, but almost before I closed my eyes the man on deck came down
reporting a light breeze. Enough to get under way with, he said.

And it was no more than just enough. I ordered the windlass manned, the
sails loosed, and the topsails set. But by the time I had cast the ship
I could hardly feel any breath of wind. Nevertheless, I trimmed the
yards and put everything on her. I was not going to give up the attempt.





PART TWO


IV

With her anchor at the bow and clothed in canvas to her very trucks, my
command seemed to stand as motionless as a model ship set on the gleams
and shadows of polished marble. It was impossible to distinguish land
from water in the enigmatical tranquillity of the immense forces of the
world. A sudden impatience possessed me.

"Won't she answer the helm at all?" I said irritably to the man whose
strong brown hands grasping the spokes of the wheel stood out lighted on
the darkness; like a symbol of mankind's claim to the direction of its
own fate.

He answered me.

"Yes, sir. She's coming-to slowly."

"Let her head come up to south."

"Aye, aye, sir."

I paced the poop. There was not a sound but that of my footsteps, till
the man spoke again.

"She is at south now, sir."

I felt a slight tightness of the chest before I gave out the first
course of my first command to the silent night, heavy with dew and
sparkling with stars. There was a finality in the act committing me to
the endless vigilance of my lonely task.

"Steady her head at that," I said at last. "The course is south."

"South, sir," echoed the man.

I sent below the second mate and his watch and remained in charge,
walking the deck through the chill, somnolent hours that precede the
dawn.

Slight puffs came and went, and whenever they were strong enough to wake
up the black water the murmur alongside ran through my very heart in
a delicate crescendo of delight and died away swiftly. I was bitterly
tired. The very stars seemed weary of waiting for daybreak. It came at
last with a mother-of-pearl sheen at the zenith, such as I had never
seen before in the tropics, unglowing, almost gray, with a strange
reminder of high latitudes.

The voice of the look-out man hailed from forward:

"Land on the port bow, sir."

"All right."

Leaning on the rail I never even raised my eyes.

The motion of the ship was imperceptible. Presently Ransome brought me
the cup of morning coffee. After I had drunk it I looked ahead, and
in the still streak of very bright pale orange light I saw the land
profiled flatly as if cut out of black paper and seeming to float on
the water as light as cork. But the rising sun turned it into mere dark
vapour, a doubtful, massive shadow trembling in the hot glare.

The watch finished washing decks. I went below and stopped at Mr. Burns'
door (he could not bear to have it shut), but hesitated to speak to him
till he moved his eyes. I gave him the news.

"Sighted Cape Liant at daylight. About fifteen miles."

He moved his lips then, but I heard no sound till I put my ear down, and
caught the peevish comment: "This is crawling. . . . No luck."

"Better luck than standing still, anyhow," I pointed out resignedly, and
left him to whatever thoughts or fancies haunted his awful immobility.

Later that morning, when relieved by my second officer, I threw myself
on my couch and for some three hours or so I really found oblivion. It
was so perfect that on waking up I wondered where I was. Then came the
immense relief of the thought: on board my ship! At sea! At sea!

Through the port-holes I beheld an unruffled, sun-smitten horizon. The
horizon of a windless day. But its spaciousness alone was enough to give
me a sense of a fortunate escape, a momentary exultation of freedom.

I stepped out into the saloon with my heart lighter than it had been for
days. Ransome was at the sideboard preparing to lay the table for the
first sea dinner of the passage. He turned his head, and something in
his eyes checked my modest elation.

Instinctively I asked: "What is it now?" not expecting in the least the
answer I got. It was given with that sort of contained serenity which
was characteristic of the man.

"I am afraid we haven't left all sickness behind us, sir."

"We haven't! What's the matter?"

He told me then that two of our men had been taken bad with fever in
the night. One of them was burning and the other was shivering, but he
thought that it was pretty much the same thing. I thought so, too. I
felt shocked by the news. "One burning, the other shivering, you say?
No. We haven't left the sickness behind. Do they look very ill?"

"Middling bad, sir." Ransome's eyes gazed steadily into mine. We
exchanged smiles. Ransome's a little wistful, as usual, mine no doubt
grim enough, to correspond with my secret exasperation.

I asked:

"Was there any wind at all this morning?"

"Can hardly say that, sir. We've moved all the time though. The land
ahead seems a little nearer."

That was it. A little nearer. Whereas if we had only had a little more
wind, only a very little more, we might, we should, have been abreast
of Liant by this time and increasing our distance from that contaminated
shore. And it was not only the distance. It seemed to me that a stronger
breeze would have blown away the contamination which clung to the ship.
It obviously did cling to the ship. Two men. One burning, one shivering.
I felt a distinct reluctance to go and look at them. What was the good?
Poison is poison. Tropical fever is tropical fever. But that it
should have stretched its claw after us over the sea seemed to me an
extraordinary and unfair license. I could hardly believe that it could
be anything worse than the last desperate pluck of the evil from which
we were escaping into the clean breath of the sea. If only that breath
had been a little stronger. However, there was the quinine against the
fever. I went into the spare cabin where the medicine chest was kept to
prepare two doses. I opened it full of faith as a man opens a miraculous
shrine. The upper part was inhabited by a collection of bottles, all
square-shouldered and as like each other as peas. Under that orderly
array there were two drawers, stuffed as full of things as one could
imagine--paper packages, bandages, cardboard boxes officially labelled.
The lower of the two, in one of its compartments, contained our
provision of quinine.

There were five bottles, all round and all of a size. One was about
a third full. The other four remained still wrapped up in paper and
sealed. But I did not expect to see an envelope lying on top of them. A
square envelope, belonging, in fact, to the ship's stationery.

It lay so that I could see it was not closed down, and on picking it
up and turning it over I perceived that it was addressed to myself. It
contained a half-sheet of notepaper, which I unfolded with a queer sense
of dealing with the uncanny, but without any excitement as people meet
and do extraordinary things in a dream.

"My dear Captain," it began, but I ran to the signature. The writer was
the doctor. The date was that of the day on which, returning from my
visit to Mr. Burns in the hospital, I had found the excellent doctor
waiting for me in the cabin; and when he told me that he had been
putting in time inspecting the medicine chest for me. How bizarre! While
expecting me to come in at any moment he had been amusing himself by
writing me a letter, and then as I came in had hastened to stuff it into
the medicine-chest drawer. A rather incredible proceeding. I turned to
the text in wonder.

In a large, hurried, but legible hand the good, sympathetic man for some
reason, either of kindness or more likely impelled by the irresistible
desire to express his opinion, with which he didn't want to damp my
hopes before, was warning me not to put my trust in the beneficial
effects of a change from land to sea. "I didn't want to add to your
worries by discouraging your hopes," he wrote. "I am afraid that,
medically speaking, the end of your troubles is not yet." In short,
he expected me to have to fight a probable return of tropical illness.
Fortunately I had a good provision of quinine. I should put my trust in
that, and administer it steadily, when the ship's health would certainly
improve.

I crumpled up the letter and rammed it into my pocket. Ransome carried
off two big doses to the men forward. As to myself, I did not go on deck
as yet. I went instead to the door of Mr. Burns' room, and gave him that
news, too.

It was impossible to say the effect it had on him. At first I thought
that he was speechless. His head lay sunk in the pillow. He moved his
lips enough, however, to assure me that he was getting much stronger; a
statement shockingly untrue on the face of it.

That afternoon I took my watch as a matter of course. A great
over-heated stillness enveloped the ship and seemed to hold her
motionless in a flaming ambience composed in two shades of blue. Faint,
hot puffs eddied nervelessly from her sails. And yet she moved. She must
have. For, as the sun was setting, we had drawn abreast of Cape Liant
and dropped it behind us: an ominous retreating shadow in the last
gleams of twilight.

In the evening, under the crude glare of his lamp, Mr. Burns seemed to
have come more to the surface of his bedding. It was as if a
depressing hand had been lifted off him. He answered my few words by a
comparatively long, connected speech. He asserted himself strongly.
If he escaped being smothered by this stagnant heat, he said, he was
confident that in a very few days he would be able to come up on deck
and help me.

While he was speaking I trembled lest this effort of energy should leave
him lifeless before my eyes. But I cannot deny that there was something
comforting in his willingness. I made a suitable reply, but pointed out
to him that the only thing that could really help us was wind--a fair
wind.

He rolled his head impatiently on the pillow. And it was not comforting
in the least to hear him begin to mutter crazily about the late captain,
that old man buried in latitude 8 d 20', right in our way--ambushed at
the entrance of the Gulf.

"Are you still thinking of your late captain, Mr. Burns?" I said. "I
imagine the dead feel no animosity against the living. They care nothing
for them."

"You don't know that one," he breathed out feebly.

"No. I didn't know him, and he didn't know me. And so he can't have any
grievance against me, anyway."

"Yes. But there's all the rest of us on board," he insisted.

I felt the inexpugnable strength of common sense being insidiously
menaced by this gruesome, by this insane, delusion. And I said:

"You mustn't talk so much. You will tire yourself."

"And there is the ship herself," he persisted in a whisper.

"Now, not a word more," I said, stepping in and laying my hand on his
cool forehead. It proved to me that this atrocious absurdity was rooted
in the man himself and not in the disease, which, apparently, had
emptied him of every power, mental and physical, except that one fixed
idea.

I avoided giving Mr. Burns any opening for conversation for the next few
days. I merely used to throw him a hasty, cheery word when passing his
door. I believe that if he had had the strength he would have called out
after me more than once. But he hadn't the strength. Ransome, however,
observed to me one afternoon that the mate "seemed to be picking up
wonderfully."

"Did he talk any nonsense to you of late?" I asked casually.

"No, sir." Ransome was startled by the direct question; but, after a
pause, he added equably: "He told me this morning, sir, that he was
sorry he had to bury our late captain right in the ship's way, as one
may say, out of the Gulf."

"Isn't this nonsense enough for you?" I asked, looking confidently at
the intelligent, quiet face on which the secret uneasiness in the man's
breast had thrown a transparent veil of care.

Ransome didn't know. He had not given a thought to the matter. And with
a faint smile he flitted away from me on his never-ending duties, with
his usual guarded activity.

Two more days passed. We had advanced a little way--a very little
way--into the larger space of the Gulf of Siam. Seizing eagerly upon
the elation of the first command thrown into my lap, by the agency of
Captain Giles, I had yet an uneasy feeling that such luck as this has
got perhaps to be paid for in some way. I had held, professionally,
a review of my chances. I was competent enough for that. At least, I
thought so. I had a general sense of my preparedness which only a man
pursuing a calling he loves can know. That feeling seemed to me the most
natural thing in the world. As natural as breathing. I imagined I could
not have lived without it.

I don't know what I expected. Perhaps nothing else than that
special intensity of existence which is the quintessence of youthful
aspirations. Whatever I expected I did not expect to be beset by
hurricanes. I knew better than that. In the Gulf of Siam there are no
hurricanes. But neither did I expect to find myself bound hand and foot
to the hopeless extent which was revealed to me as the days went on.

Not that the evil spell held us always motionless. Mysterious currents
drifted us here and there, with a stealthy power made manifest only by
the changing vistas of the islands fringing the east shore of the Gulf.
And there were winds, too, fitful and deceitful. They raised hopes only
to dash them into the bitterest disappointment, promises of advance
ending in lost ground, expiring in sighs, dying into dumb stillness in
which the currents had it all their own way--their own inimical way.

The island of Koh-ring, a great, black, upheaved ridge amongst a lot of
tiny islets, lying upon the glassy water like a triton amongst minnows,
seemed to be the centre of the fatal circle. It seemed impossible to get
away from it. Day after day it remained in sight. More than once, in
a favourable breeze, I would take its bearings in the fast-ebbing
twilight, thinking that it was for the last time. Vain hope. A night of
fitful airs would undo the gains of temporary favour, and the rising
sun would throw out the black relief of Koh-ring looking more barren,
inhospitable, and grim than ever.

"It's like being bewitched, upon my word," I said once to Mr. Burns,
from my usual position in the doorway.

He was sitting up in his bed-place. He was progressing toward the world
of living men; if he could hardly have been said to have rejoined it
yet. He nodded to me his frail and bony head in a wisely mysterious
assent.

"Oh, yes, I know what you mean," I said. "But you cannot expect me
to believe that a dead man has the power to put out of joint the
meteorology of this part of the world. Though indeed it seems to have
gone utterly wrong. The land and sea breezes have got broken up into
small pieces. We cannot depend upon them for five minutes together."

"It won't be very long now before I can come up on deck," muttered Mr.
Burns, "and then we shall see."

Whether he meant this for a promise to grapple with supernatural evil I
couldn't tell. At any rate, it wasn't the kind of assistance I needed.
On the other hand, I had been living on deck practically night and day
so as to take advantage of every chance to get my ship a little more to
the southward. The mate, I could see, was extremely weak yet, and not
quite rid of his delusion, which to me appeared but a symptom of his
disease. At all events, the hopefulness of an invalid was not to be
discouraged. I said:

"You will be most welcome there, I am sure, Mr. Burns. If you go on
improving at this rate you'll be presently one of the healthiest men in
the ship."

This pleased him, but his extreme emaciation converted his
self-satisfied smile into a ghastly exhibition of long teeth under the
red moustache.

"Aren't the fellows improving, sir?" he asked soberly, with an extremely
sensible expression of anxiety on his face.

I answered him only with a vague gesture and went away from the door.
The fact was that disease played with us capriciously very much as the
winds did. It would go from one man to another with a lighter or heavier
touch, which always left its mark behind, staggering some, knocking
others over for a time, leaving this one, returning to another, so that
all of them had now an invalidish aspect and a hunted, apprehensive look
in their eyes; while Ransome and I, the only two completely untouched,
went amongst them assiduously distributing quinine. It was a double
fight. The adverse weather held us in front and the disease pressed on
our rear. I must say that the men were very good. The constant toil of
trimming yards they faced willingly. But all spring was out of their
limbs, and as I looked at them from the poop I could not keep from my
mind the dreadful impression that they were moving in poisoned air.

Down below, in his cabin, Mr. Burns had advanced so far as not only to
be able to sit up, but even to draw up his legs. Clasping them with bony
arms, like an animated skeleton, he emitted deep, impatient sighs.

"The great thing to do, sir," he would tell me on every occasion, when I
gave him the chance, "the great thing is to get the ship past 8 d 20' of
latitude. Once she's past that we're all right."

At first I used only to smile at him, though, God knows, I had not much
heart left for smiles. But at last I lost my patience.

"Oh, yes. The latitude 8 d 20'. That's where you buried your late
captain, isn't it?" Then with severity: "Don't you think, Mr. Burns,
it's about time you dropped all that nonsense?"

He rolled at me his deep-sunken eyes in a glance of invincible
obstinacy. But for the rest he only muttered, just loud enough for me
to hear, something about "Not surprised . . . find . . . play us some
beastly trick yet. . . ."

Such passages as this were not exactly wholesome for my resolution. The
stress of adversity was beginning to tell on me. At the same time, I
felt a contempt for that obscure weakness of my soul. I said to myself
disdainfully that it should take much more than that to affect in the
smallest degree my fortitude.

I didn't know then how soon and from what unexpected direction it would
be attacked.

It was the very next day. The sun had risen clear of the southern
shoulder of Koh-ring, which still hung, like an evil attendant, on our
port quarter. It was intensely hateful to my sight. During the night
we had been heading all round the compass, trimming the yards again and
again, to what I fear must have been for the most part imaginary puffs
of air. Then just about sunrise we got for an hour an inexplicable,
steady breeze, right in our teeth. There was no sense in it. It fitted
neither with the season of the year nor with the secular experience
of seamen as recorded in books, nor with the aspect of the sky. Only
purposeful malevolence could account for it. It sent us travelling at
a great pace away from our proper course; and if we had been out on
pleasure sailing bent it would have been a delightful breeze, with the
awakened sparkle of the sea, with the sense of motion and a feeling of
unwonted freshness. Then, all at once, as if disdaining to carry farther
the sorry jest, it dropped and died out completely in less than five
minutes. The ship's head swung where it listed; the stilled sea took on
the polish of a steel plate in the calm.

I went below, not because I meant to take some rest, but simply because
I couldn't bear to look at it just then. The indefatigable Ransome was
busy in the saloon. It had become a regular practice with him to give
me an informal health report in the morning. He turned away from the
sideboard with his usual pleasant, quiet gaze. No shadow rested on his
intelligent forehead.

"There are a good many of them middling bad this morning, sir," he said
in a calm tone.

"What? All knocked out?"

"Only two actually in their bunks, sir, but--"

"It's the last night that has done for them. We have had to pull and
haul all the blessed time."

"I heard, sir. I had a mind to come out and help only, you know. . . ."

"Certainly not. You mustn't. . . . The fellows lie at night about the
decks, too. It isn't good for them."

Ransome assented. But men couldn't be looked after like children.
Moreover, one could hardly blame them for trying for such coolness and
such air as there was to be found on deck. He himself, of course, knew
better.

He was, indeed, a reasonable man. Yet it would have been hard to say
that the others were not. The last few days had been for us like the
ordeal of the fiery furnace. One really couldn't quarrel with their
common, imprudent humanity making the best of the moments of relief,
when the night brought in the illusion of coolness and the starlight
twinkled through the heavy, dew-laden air. Moreover, most of them were
so weakened that hardly anything could be done without everybody that
could totter mustering on the braces. No, it was no use remonstrating
with them. But I fully believed that quinine was of very great use
indeed.

I believed in it. I pinned my faith to it. It would save the men, the
ship, break the spell by its medicinal virtue, make time of no account,
the weather but a passing worry and, like a magic powder working against
mysterious malefices, secure the first passage of my first command
against the evil powers of calms and pestilence. I looked upon it as
more precious than gold, and unlike gold, of which there ever hardly
seems to be enough anywhere, the ship had a sufficient store of it. I
went in to get it with the purpose of weighing out doses. I stretched my
hand with the feeling of a man reaching for an unfailing panacea, took
up a fresh bottle and unrolled the wrapper, noticing as I did so that
the ends, both top and bottom, had come unsealed. . . .

But why record all the swift steps of the appalling discovery? You have
guessed the truth already. There was the wrapper, the bottle, and the
white powder inside, some sort of powder! But it wasn't quinine. One
look at it was quite enough. I remember that at the very moment of
picking up the bottle, before I even dealt with the wrapper, the weight
of the object I had in my hand gave me an instant premonition. Quinine
is as light as feathers; and my nerves must have been exasperated into
an extraordinary sensibility. I let the bottle smash itself on the
floor. The stuff, whatever it was, felt gritty under the sole of my
shoe. I snatched up the next bottle and then the next. The weight alone
told the tale. One after another they fell, breaking at my feet, not
because I threw them down in my dismay, but slipping through my fingers
as if this disclosure were too much for my strength.

It is a fact that the very greatness of a mental shock helps one to bear
up against it by producing a sort of temporary insensibility. I came out
of the state-room stunned, as if something heavy had dropped on my head.
From the other side of the saloon, across the table, Ransome, with a
duster in his hand, stared open-mouthed. I don't think that I looked
wild. It is quite possible that I appeared to be in a hurry because
I was instinctively hastening up on deck. An example this of training
become instinct. The difficulties, the dangers, the problems of a ship
at sea must be met on deck.

To this fact, as it were of nature, I responded instinctively; which
may be taken as a proof that for a moment I must have been robbed of my
reason.

I was certainly off my balance, a prey to impulse, for at the bottom of
the stairs I turned and flung myself at the doorway of Mr. Burns' cabin.
The wildness of his aspect checked my mental disorder. He was sitting up
in his bunk, his body looking immensely long, his head drooping a little
sideways, with affected complacency. He flourished, in his trembling
hand, on the end of a forearm no thicker than a walking-stick, a shining
pair of scissors which he tried before my very eyes to jab at his
throat.

I was to a certain extent horrified; but it was rather a secondary sort
of effect, not really strong enough to make me yell at him in some such
manner as: "Stop!" . . . "Heavens!" . . . "What are you doing?"

In reality he was simply overtaxing his returning strength in a shaky
attempt to clip off the thick growth of his red beard. A large towel was
spread over his lap, and a shower of stiff hairs, like bits of copper
wire, was descending on it at every snip of the scissors.

He turned to me his face grotesque beyond the fantasies of mad dreams,
one cheek all bushy as if with a swollen flame, the other denuded and
sunken, with the untouched long moustache on that side asserting itself,
lonely and fierce. And while he stared thunderstruck, with the gaping
scissors on his fingers, I shouted my discovery at him fiendishly, in
six words, without comment.




V

I heard the clatter of the scissors escaping from his hand, noted the
perilous heave of his whole person over the edge of the bunk after them,
and then, returning to my first purpose, pursued my course on the deck.
The sparkle of the sea filled my eyes. It was gorgeous and barren,
monotonous and without hope under the empty curve of the sky. The sails
hung motionless and slack, the very folds of their sagging surfaces
moved no more than carved granite. The impetuosity of my advent made the
man at the helm start slightly. A block aloft squeaked incomprehensibly,
for what on earth could have made it do so? It was a whistling note like
a bird's. For a long, long time I faced an empty world, steeped in an
infinity of silence, through which the sunshine poured and flowed for
some mysterious purpose. Then I heard Ransome's voice at my elbow.

"I have put Mr. Burns back to bed, sir."

"You have."

"Well, sir, he got out, all of a sudden, but when he let go the edge of
his bunk he fell down. He isn't light-headed, though, it seems to me."

"No," I said dully, without looking at Ransome. He waited for a moment,
then cautiously, as if not to give offence: "I don't think we need lose
much of that stuff, sir," he said, "I can sweep it up, every bit of
it almost, and then we could sift the glass out. I will go about it at
once. It will not make the breakfast late, not ten minutes."

"Oh, yes," I said bitterly. "Let the breakfast wait, sweep up every bit
of it, and then throw the damned lot overboard!"

The profound silence returned, and when I looked over my shoulder,
Ransome--the intelligent, serene Ransome--had vanished from my side.
The intense loneliness of the sea acted like poison on my brain. When I
turned my eyes to the ship, I had a morbid vision of her as a floating
grave. Who hasn't heard of ships found floating, haphazard, with their
crews all dead? I looked at the seaman at the helm, I had an impulse to
speak to him, and, indeed, his face took on an expectant cast as if he
had guessed my intention. But in the end I went below, thinking I
would be alone with the greatness of my trouble for a little while.
But through his open door Mr. Burns saw me come down, and addressed me
grumpily: "Well, sir?"

I went in. "It isn't well at all," I said.

Mr. Burns, reestablished in his bed-place, was concealing his hirsute
cheek in the palm of his hand.

"That confounded fellow has taken away the scissors from me," were the
next words he said.

The tension I was suffering from was so great that it was perhaps just
as well that Mr. Burns had started on his grievance. He seemed very sore
about it and grumbled, "Does he think I am mad, or what?"

"I don't think so, Mr. Burns," I said. I looked upon him at that moment
as a model of self-possession. I even conceived on that account a sort of
admiration for that man, who had (apart from the intense materiality of
what was left of his beard) come as near to being a disembodied spirit
as any man can do and live. I noticed the preternatural sharpness of the
ridge of his nose, the deep cavities of his temples, and I envied him.
He was so reduced that he would probably die very soon. Enviable man!
So near extinction--while I had to bear within me a tumult of suffering
vitality, doubt, confusion, self-reproach, and an indefinite reluctance
to meet the horrid logic of the situation. I could not help muttering:
"I feel as if I were going mad myself."

Mr. Burns glared spectrally, but otherwise was wonderfully composed.

"I always thought he would play us some deadly trick," he said, with a
peculiar emphasis on the _he_.

It gave me a mental shock, but I had neither the mind, nor the heart,
nor the spirit to argue with him. My form of sickness was indifference.
The creeping paralysis of a hopeless outlook. So I only gazed at him.
Mr. Burns broke into further speech.

"Eh! What! No! You won't believe it? Well, how do you account for this?
How do you think it could have happened?"

"Happened?" I repeated dully. "Why, yes, how in the name of the infernal
powers did this thing happen?"

Indeed, on thinking it out, it seemed incomprehensible that it should
just be like this: the bottles emptied, refilled, rewrapped, and
replaced. A sort of plot, a sinister attempt to deceive, a thing
resembling sly vengeance, but for what? Or else a fiendish joke. But Mr.
Burns was in possession of a theory. It was simple, and he uttered it
solemnly in a hollow voice.

"I suppose they have given him about fifteen pounds in Haiphong for that
little lot."

"Mr. Burns!" I cried.

He nodded grotesquely over his raised legs, like two broomsticks in the
pyjamas, with enormous bare feet at the end.

"Why not? The stuff is pretty expensive in this part of the world, and
they were very short of it in Tonkin. And what did he care? You have
not known him. I have, and I have defied him. He feared neither God, nor
devil, nor man, nor wind, nor sea, nor his own conscience. And I believe
he hated everybody and everything. But I think he was afraid to die. I
believe I am the only man who ever stood up to him. I faced him in that
cabin where you live now, when he was sick, and I cowed him then. He
thought I was going to twist his neck for him. If he had had his way we
would have been beating up against the Nord-East monsoon, as long as he
lived and afterward, too, for ages and ages. Acting the Flying Dutchman
in the China Sea! Ha! Ha!"

"But why should he replace the bottles like this?" . . . I began.

"Why shouldn't he? Why should he want to throw the bottles away? They
fit the drawer. They belong to the medicine chest."

"And they were wrapped up," I cried.

"Well, the wrappers were there. Did it from habit, I suppose, and as
to refilling, there is always a lot of stuff they send in paper parcels
that burst after a time. And then, who can tell? I suppose you didn't
taste it, sir? But, of course, you are sure. . . ."

"No," I said. "I didn't taste it. It is all overboard now."

Behind me, a soft, cultivated voice said: "I have tasted it. It seemed a
mixture of all sorts, sweetish, saltish, very horrible."

Ransome, stepping out of the pantry, had been listening for some time,
as it was very excusable in him to do.

"A dirty trick," said Mr. Burns. "I always said he would."

The magnitude of my indignation was unbounded. And the kind, sympathetic
doctor, too. The only sympathetic man I ever knew . . . instead of
writing that warning letter, the very refinement of sympathy, why didn't
the man make a proper inspection? But, as a matter of fact, it was
hardly fair to blame the doctor. The fittings were in order and the
medicine chest is an officially arranged affair. There was nothing
really to arouse the slightest suspicion. The person I could never
forgive was myself. Nothing should ever be taken for granted. The seed
of everlasting remorse was sown in my breast.

"I feel it's all my fault," I exclaimed, "mine and nobody else's. That's
how I feel. I shall never forgive myself."

"That's very foolish, sir," said Mr. Burns fiercely.

And after this effort he fell back exhausted on his bed. He closed his
eyes, he panted; this affair, this abominable surprise had shaken him
up, too. As I turned away I perceived Ransome looking at me blankly. He
appreciated what it meant, but managed to produce his pleasant, wistful
smile. Then he stepped back into his pantry, and I rushed up on deck
again to see whether there was any wind, any breath under the sky, any
stir of the air, any sign of hope. The deadly stillness met me again.
Nothing was changed except that there was a different man at the wheel.
He looked ill. His whole figure drooped, and he seemed rather to cling
to the spokes than hold them with a controlling grip. I said to him:

"You are not fit to be here."

"I can manage, sir," he said feebly.

As a matter of fact, there was nothing for him to do. The ship had no
steerage way. She lay with her head to the westward, the everlasting
Koh-ring visible over the stern, with a few small islets, black spots
in the great blaze, swimming before my troubled eyes. And but for those
bits of land there was no speck on the sky, no speck on the water,
no shape of vapour, no wisp of smoke, no sail, no boat, no stir of
humanity, no sign of life, nothing!

The first question was, what to do? What could one do? The first thing
to do obviously was to tell the men. I did it that very day. I wasn't
going to let the knowledge simply get about. I would face them. They
were assembled on the quarterdeck for the purpose. Just before I stepped
out to speak to them I discovered that life could hold terrible moments.
No confessed criminal had ever been so oppressed by his sense of
guilt. This is why, perhaps, my face was set hard and my voice curt and
unemotional while I made my declaration that I could do nothing more
for the sick in the way of drugs. As to such care as could be given them
they knew they had had it.

I would have held them justified in tearing me limb from limb. The
silence which followed upon my words was almost harder to bear than the
angriest uproar. I was crushed by the infinite depth of its reproach.
But, as a matter of fact, I was mistaken. In a voice which I had
great difficulty in keeping firm, I went on: "I suppose, men, you have
understood what I said, and you know what it means."

A voice or two were heard: "Yes, sir. . . . We understand."

They had kept silent simply because they thought that they were not
called to say anything; and when I told them that I intended to run into
Singapore and that the best chance for the ship and the men was in the
efforts all of us, sick and well, must make to get her along out of
this, I received the encouragement of a low assenting murmur and of
a louder voice exclaiming: "Surely there is a way out of this blamed
hole."

